A novel hybrid bioprocess strategy addressing key challenges of advanced biomanufacturing.
Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) are commonly manufactured by either discontinuous operations like fed-batch (FB) or continuous processes such as steady-state perfusion. Both process types comprise opposing advantages and disadvantages in areas such as plant utilization, feasible cell densities, media consumption and process monitoring effort. In this study, we show feasibility of a promising novel hybrid process strategy that combines beneficial attributes of both process formats. In detail, our strategy comprises a short duration FB, followed by a fast media exchange and cell density readjustment, marking the start of the next FB cycle. Utilizing a small-scale screening tool, we were able to identify beneficial process parameters, including FB interval duration and reinoculation cell density, that allow for multiple cycles of the outlined process in a reproducible manner. In addition, we could demonstrate scalability of the process to a 5L benchtop system, using a fluidized-bed centrifuge as scalable media exchange system. The novel process showed increased productivity (+217%) as well as longer cultivation duration, in comparison to a standard FB with a significantly lower media consumption per produced product (-50%) and a decreased need for process monitoring, in comparison to a perfusion cultivation. Further, the process revealed constant glycosylation pattern in comparison to the perfusion cultivation and has strong potential for further scale-up, due to the use of fully scalable cultivation and media exchange platforms. In summary, we have developed a novel hybrid process strategy that tackles the key challenges of current biomanufacturing of either low productivity or high media consumption, representing a new and innovative approach for future process intensification efforts.
3 Results.
The aim of this study was to combine the advantages of a perfusion process like elongated duration and increased cell densities overtime with the low media and consumable consumption of a discontinuous process format. In detail, this new designed process, called continuous fed-batch (cFB) should comprise a fixed FB duration (FB cycle) with a consecutive rapid and complete media exchange (IH operation) including a cell density adjustment (bleed). To test the applicability of this process a high throughput small-scale screening was conducted, utilizing a commercially relevant CHO cell line, comprising different durations and starting cell counts. Subsequent, the most promising approach was scaled up to a benchtop system (5L) to investigate the influence of the scalable exchange method via the fluidized bed centrifuge (FBC).
3.1 Process characterization at small scale.
A small-scale trial was conducted to investigate a suitable cultivation scheme, including optimal FB cycle duration and cell density for reinoculation after the IH. Cells should remain in the logarithmic growth phase between IHs and therefore the cell bleed after each harvest cycle aims on keeping the cells in the proliferative state, defined as positive range of the cell specific growth rate (micro), to enable a continuous process mode. Three different approaches were investigated, re-inoculation at a viable cell count (VCC) of 20 x 106 cells/mL and an interval of 2 days (VCC 20 2d), re-inoculation at 30 x 106 cells/mL and an interval of 2 days (VCC 30 2d) and re-inoculation at 20 x 106 cells/mL and an interval of 3 days (VCC 20 3d), further explanation for the design space is discussed in Section 4.1. The VCC as well as the viability for the different conditions over time is shown in Figures 1A-C. All approaches show a similar growth and viability for the first 6 days as expected and reached VCCs of around 20 x 106 cells/mL. Subsequent, the first IH operations were conducted for each approach, indicated by the dotted lines.
The VCC 20 2d approach (Figure 1A) grew reproducible to a peak cell density of ~30 x 106 cells/mL over the first two FB cycles. Subsequent, from day 12 to the end of the cultivation a variation in peak cell density was visible (25-35 x 106 cells/mL), partially due to variations in reinoculation densities caused by vessel change which will be discussed further in Section 4.3. This trend is supported by the specific growth rate over time visible in Supplementary Figure S1. In total six repetition could be conducted in the small-scale trials showing decreased growth in the last repetitions. The viability values for the VCC 20 d2 approach showed a decrease to 85% at day 12, after which a stabilization of viabilities is visible and a final viability of 79% is reached at day 18. Interestingly, the stabilization of the viability and high variation in peak VCC start occurring from day 12, concomitant with the change of the bioreactor vessel.
The approach with increased cell densities (VCC 30 d2) reached a peak cell density of 41.2 x 106 cells/mL during the first FB phase, visible in Figure 1B. Consecutively, after the following IH operation the reinoculation cell density was set to 30 x 106 cells/mL (d8) and the next FB phase was initiated. During the subsequent FB intervals, a decline in cell growth was visible, resulting in a decrease of peak cell densities for this approach, even with the bioreactor change at day 12. Similar to the VCC the viability and specific growth rate decreased over the time course, and especially after the last IH procedure at day 14 leading to the termination of the culture.
Finally, the third investigated scenario (Figure 1C) with an elongated FB duration of 3 days and reinoculation cell densities of 20 x 106 cells/mL, VCC 20 3d, showed a stable cell growth after the first IH (d6) up to the end of the first FB cycle on day 9, reaching peak cell densities of 32.5 x 106 cells/mL. However, after this no further cell growth, in cell count and specific growth rate, within the second FB cycle could be detected and a decrease in cell viability occurred, leading to an end of the cultivation on day 12. Further data of lactate and glucose levels can be found in the Supplementary Material.
To gain further insight into the process the average cell diameter of each approach is displayed in Figure 1D. Interestingly, all approaches show a similar increase overtime from around 14 microm up to 18 microm. Notably, both cultures that received a vessel exchange (VCC20 2d and VCC30 2d) showed a temporary decrease in cell diameter shortly after the vessel change. Afterwards, the VCC20 2d showed a stabilization of the cellular diameter up to day 17.
To further analyze the approaches within the new designed process, product titers were quantified from day 6 on (Figures 2A-C). Thereby, all three approaches showed similar mAb titers of around 1 g/L up to day 6 before the initial IH operation. Subsequently, due to limited sampling volume at 15 mL scale no residual mAb titer sample was measured after the media exchange. Therefore, to improve visibility within Figures 2A-C, 0 g/L was assumed as starting point. For the approach VCC 20 2d, a mAb titer of 1.7 g/L (Figure 2A) could be detected after the first 2-day FB cycle on day 8. In the subsequent FB cycles, an increase to final titers of 2.0-2.8 g/L mAb, respectively, could be observed. Interestingly, an increase for the cell specific productivity (qP) over time is visible (bars in Figure 2A) from 36 pg/c/d within the first 2-day cultivation interval to 50-60 pg/c/d for the last four cycles. Accordingly, the mAb titer of the VCC 30 2d approach, Figure 2B, inclined from 2.3 g/L in the second IH (day 8) to over 3 g/L in the subsequent harvests. This increase is also reflected in the qP values, starting at around 35 pg/c/d for the second IH and reaching around 61-63 pg/c/d in the latest harvests. The titer values for the approach VCC 20 d3, shown in Figure 2C, indicate a stronger increase in titer in comparison to the VCC 20 2d approach with around 2.8-3.3 g/L in the first vs. the second 3 days of FB operation, respectively. Similar to other investigated approaches the qP values are increased from the second harvest (35 pg/c/d) to the third harvest (55 pg/c/d). Furthermore, the integrated titer over the complete cultivation duration is shown within the Supplementary Material. Interestingly, the incline in qP and titer correlates with the diameter increase shown in Figure 1D, indicating a proportional relation.
As an important byproduct and cell culture state indicator, the ammonia concentration was monitored over time. The VCC 20 d2 approach showed constant and low levels ranging between 2.2- and 3.5-mM ammonia over the entire cultivation time of 18 days. However, the ammonia concentrations for VCC 30 d2 and VCC 20 d3 increased to 6.6 and 8.4 mmol/L over the course of cultivations, indicating a significant ammonia accumulation in these cultures.
The data overall show that for each investigated approach at least 2 IH intervals could be carried out and an increase in qP with increasing process duration could be obtained, indicating a beneficial process strategy. Based on our data set the most promising approach, characterized by longest proliferating phase and low and stable amounts of ammonia over multiple IH cycles was the VCC20 d2. Therefore, the conducted small-scale screening indicates a feasible scenario for the proposed cFB process if a reinoculation cell density of 20 x 106 cells/mL and an FB duration of 2 days is pursued (VCC20 d2). In accordance, this approach was chosen for a scale-up to a 5 L bioreactor scale, comprising a fluidized-bed centrifuge (FBC) as scalable cell separation method for the IH operations.
3.2 Proof of concept at benchtop scale.
Following the process characterization of the different proposed cFB scenarios at screening scale a process scale-up with the identified preferential parameters, re-inoculation cell density 20 x 106 cells/mL and a 2-day interval, was conducted. This proof-of-concept run was pursued utilizing a 5 L benchtop reactor and a single-use FBC system for time saving, gentle and complete media exchange. Two parallel cultivations were conducted, comprising one approach with enriched cell culture media, further explained in Section 2.4, as wash buffer for the FBC operation (cFBPerfM) and a second approach utilizing PBS as wash buffer (cFB PBS).
The course of VCC and viability for both benchtop reactors over time is displayed in Figure 3A. The cultivation conducted with enriched media as wash buffer (cFB PerfM; black line) showed overall consistent growth between the FB cycles. Overall peak cell densities after 2 days ranging from 35 x 106 to 41 x 106 cells/mL were reached throughout all six repetitions. This consistent growth is as well confirmed by the stable specific growth rate of around 0.37 1/d visible in the Supplementary Material. Additionally, the cell culture maintained a high cell viability of over 93% until the last day of the process. The approach utilizing PBS as wash buffer during IH operations (blue line) showed very similar trends. In this approach slightly decreased peak cell densities between 31 x 106 and 35 x 106 cells/mL were reached verified by a constant but lower specific growth rate of 0.29 1/d (Supplementary Material). This was accompanied by a minor reduction in viability down to 89% on day 17 in comparison to the cFB PerfM approach. Overall, cells showed better and more consisted growth behavior between IH operations as well as increased viability profiles overtime in comparison to the small-scale trials.
To further characterize the new process the average cell diameter was analyzed and is shown in Figure 3B. A similar increase for both reactors is visible during the first few days of cultivation. Subsequent, a stabilization of the diameter at 16-17 microm is visible for both set of experiments. Interestingly, after day 8 first small differences are visible with an overall increased diameter for the cFB PBS experiment of around 0.5 microm over the course of the cultivation. Overall, a specific behavior is noticeable in the diameter oscillation, with a clear increase during the first 12 h after IH operation, and a subsequent decrease over the following 12 h. Interestingly, the cell counts show an inverse behavior meaning that cells either grow in cell count or in cellular diameter within one period. To further analyze the cellular characteristics between both approaches the IVCC (Integral of Viable cell count) and IVCV (Integral of viable cell volume) were calculated. The reactor washed with PBS showed slightly decreased amounts of final IVCC for the overall process compared to the cFB PerfM (345 x 106 cells/mL vs. 359 x 106 cells/mL, respectively). This decrease can be explained by the small difference in peak cell densities visible in Figure 3A. Vice versa, the values for the IVCV showed a small increase for the cFB PBS experiment, as a result of the increase in diameter visible in Figure 3B.
To further gain insight into the process product specific parameters for both approaches like titer and cell specific productivity (qP) were determined and compared. Figure 3A shows the mAB titer overtime for the cFB PerfM cultivation indicated as solid line and the qP within a FB cycle represented by the individual bars. The titer curve steadily increases to the first IH operation to around 0.5 g/L, consecutively titers within FB cycles showed enhancing values from 1.5 up to 2.2 g/L in the 4th IH cycle (day 11) and then remained constant around 2.1-2.2 g/L. Similar to the titer values the qP values increased over time from around 27-40 pg/c/d at day 9 after which values remained constant around 40 pg/c/d. Similar to the results from the cFB PerfM reactor the titer in the cFB PBS reactor showed a constant increase in the first days to around 0.5 g/L. Consecutive, an increase of titer up to around 2 g/L on day 9 is visible, after which a constant value could be detected to the end of each cultivation. The qP values show similar values for the PBS reactor as for the PerfM reactor, increasing from 27 up to 40 pg/c/d, with a small outlier on day 15 with 45 pg/c/d. Additionally, during the washing step almost all mAb was removed and thus very high mAb recoveries of approximately 95% were obtained in all FBC operations (data not shown) and titer measurements after IH operation revealed only minor amounts of mAB were left behind in the cell culture resulting in low start concentrations of about 0.1 g/L at the beginning of a cycle (Figures 4A, B). Besides product titers, the ammonia levels were tracked over the term of the cultivations to monitor potential byproduct inhibition (Figure 4C). Overall, ranges between 0 and 4 mmol/L were measured, with values at harvest days ranging from 0 to 2.6 mmol/L for both cultivated reactors. These values matched with the small-scale data shown in Figure 2D for the VVC20 d2 approach. Overall, this data underlines the feasibility of the cFB approach over multiple IH and FB cycles. Furthermore, our data suggest no significant impact due to PBS washing on the process performance.
3.3 Process benchmark.
Besides expression levels and metabolic byproducts, the glycan distribution should be investigated and compared to the standard operations. As reference a standard FB operation in duplicate 5L UniVessel, resulting in 3.85 g/L mAb in 12 days and a duplicate perfusion process in 250 mL small-scale system, with perfusion target of 50 x 106 cells/mL at 2.5 VVD and 1.54 g/l/d mAb production was utilized. Both processes comprised similar cell line and media systems and are established as processes in our facility. The glycosylation pattern were investigated comparing eight different IgG glycan variants (Figure 5A). While only minor differences could be detected between both cFB variants, we were able to identify distinctions to the other process formats, except for the proportion of G1F. The majority of glycan ratios for the cFB process seemed to be rather comparable to the results of the perfusion process, such as the proportions of Man5, G1, G1F', G0F and G2. However, the other glycan forms G0 and G2F seem to be more comparable to the FB operation. Interestingly, the data reveal a distinct difference between the continuous process types (cFB, perfusion) and the discontinuous process type (FB). However, overall the glycosylation profile of the novel process seems to be rather comparable with the perfusion glycans and exhibit a trend towards higher galactosylated forms.
In addition to the glycan distribution, performance attributes were compared to the standard process types. Therefore, the space time yield (STY) in g/L/d of the processes as well as the media consumption per produced mAb were calculated to assess benchmark characteristics in comparison to the existing process formats (Figure 5B). Of note, the STY for the continuous operations were calculated on daily basis for either the permeate (perfusion) or supernatant (cFB) within the constant phase, the discontinuous STY was calculated with the titer at the last day over the overall process time. As expected, the perfusion process showed the highest STY around 1.54 g/L/d, while the FB process only reached values of 0.32 g/L/d. Both cFB processes reached a STY in between of the standard processes around 1.0 g/L/d due to the elongated process times compared to the FB but decreased cell densities compared to the perfusion process. Furthermore, the ratio between the amount of dry media components, incorporating basal-, feed media and glucose, needed to produce 1 g of mAb was calculated as an indication of the media consumption of each process. Therefore, the total amount of vessel volume exchange per day (VVD) needed to be determined, comprising 1.3 Reactor volume per day (RV) for the cFB PerfM approach and 0.47 RV for the cFB PBS trial. Thereby, to decrease the residual PBS within the cFB PBS trials a high concentration of cells after centrifugation (+100 x 106 cells/mL) were executed with the FBC system, possible throughout the functional principle of the system. Thereby, this approach shows unbeneficial characteristics for the cFB PerfM trials due to increased wash buffer consumption up to 2.6 reactor volumes per single media exchange (=1.3 RV). However, former studies incorporating a different FBC method showed diminished values of 1.3 reactor volumes for a single exchange, resulting in 0.7 RV per 2 day FB cycle, which was used for calculation. The highest media usage per produced Gram mAb was observed for the perfusion process with ~56 g/g, while a very low media consumption could be identified for the FB process with ~17 g/g. Similar to the productivity, the cFB process showed a media consumption ranging in between that of both standard processes from ~31 g/g (cFB PerfM) to ~26 g/g (cFB PBS). As an alternative measure, the cost per mAb produced was calculated utilizing assumptions of, with basic medium price of 35 $/L, feed media price of 90 $/L and perfusion media price of 15 $/L. Thereby, a similar trend is visible with the lowest cost for the FB with 7.0 $/g mAb, followed by cFB PBS (12.9 $/g mAb); cFB Perf (15.4 $/g mAb) and the highest values for perfusion with 24.45 $/g mAb. This difference within the approaches is caused mainly by the optimized media exchange method in the cFB PBS trials.
Overall, the presented data proofs feasibility of the proposed FB-perfusion hybrid process over a relevant process duration of 17 days to be considered a continuous operation and successful scale-up to benchtop scale. Furthermore, the novel process allows for an efficient combination of the advantages from both standard process types, long duration and increased peak cell densities known from perfusion cultures and low media usage as in a fed batch operation. Therefore, the novel hybrid process format exhibits great potential towards highly productive continuous process.
