Optimizing effector functions of monoclonal antibodies via tailored N-glycan engineering using a dual landing pad CHO targeted integration platform.
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) eliminate cancer cells via various effector mechanisms including antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC), which are influenced by the N-glycan structures on the Fc region of mAbs. Manipulating these glycan structures on mAbs allows for optimization of therapeutic benefits associated with effector functions. Traditional approaches such as gene deletion or overexpression often lead to only all-or-nothing changes in gene expression and fail to modulate the expression of multiple genes at defined ratios and levels. In this work, we have developed a CHO cell engineering platform enabling modulation of multiple gene expression to tailor the N-glycan profiles of mAbs for enhanced effector functions. Our platform involves a CHO targeted integration platform with two independent landing pads, allowing expression of multiple genes at two pre-determined genomic sites. By combining with internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-based polycistronic vectors, we simultaneously modulated the expression of alpha-mannosidase II (MANII) and chimeric beta-1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase III (cGNTIII) genes in CHO cells. This strategy enabled the production of mAbs carrying N-glycans with various levels of bisecting and non-fucosylated structures. Importantly, these engineered mAbs exhibited different degrees of effector cell activation and CDC, facilitating the identification of mAbs with optimal effector functions. This platform was demonstrated as a powerful tool for producing antibody therapeutics with tailored effector functions via precise engineering of N-glycan profiles. It holds promise for advancing the field of metabolic engineering in mammalian cells.
Results.
Design and characterization of a dual landing pad CHO master cell line for double RMCE.
To enable modulation of MANII and cGNTIII gene expression levels in CHO cell lines, we generated a dual landing pads CHO master cell line (dMCL) carrying two independent landing pads with balanced transcription and translation levels (Fig. 1A). The dMCL was constructed by stably integrating a second landing pad vector expressing the neomycin-resistance (NEO) gene into our existing CHO K1 master cell line (MCL), which already carried a single integrant of landing pad 1 expressing hygromycin-resistance (HYG) gene. In both landing pads, transcription was driven by the chimeric promoter (ChiP) promoter and terminated by the SV40 polyadenylation signal (pA) located upstream of FRT and FRT14, respectively. Consequently, the impaired puromycin resistant gene ((ATG-)Puro) and zeocin resistant regen ((ATG-)Zeo), lacking a start codon located downstream of FRT and FRT14, respectively, remain unexpressed until the activation of RMCE. The specificity of the RMCE reaction targeting each landing pad was conferred by two unique sets of two heterospecific recognition sites: FRT3xFRT for landing pad 1 and FRT15xFRT14 for landing pad 2. These mutant FRTs facilitated multiplexed cassette exchanges through self-recognition capabilities, with minimal cross-interaction, thus ensuring specificity for each landing pad. Each RMCE reaction involved co-transfection of a landing-pad specific targeting vector and an enhanced flippase recombinase (FLPe) expressing vector, followed by appropriate antibiotic selection to generate stably transfected pools. The targeting vectors were designed without promoters and polyadenylation signals to ensure that only cells with correct RMCE survived the antibiotic selection and faithfully expressed all genes carried in the targeting vectors. As a result, the stably transfected cell pools, having the same integration sites, were ideally isogenic with minimizing position effect and gene copy number variations.
The landing pad 1 in the dMCL had previously been confirmed to be a single integrant in the parental MCL in our previous study. We further examined the number of integration sites of the landing pad 2 in the dMCL via Southern blot. The dMCL exhibited a unique single DNA band upon digestion with XbaI, MfeI or NdeI restriction enzymes (Fig. 2A), indicating that it carried a single integrant of the landing pad 2 vector. To assess the expression capability of each landing pad, we performed RMCE to replace the HYG or/ and NEO gene with rituximab IgG1 mAb expression cassettes to generate single plasmid and double plasmids integrated stable cell pools. The targeting vector for landing pad 1 was designed to carry rituximab light chain (LC), heavy chain (HC) and DsRed genes linked through multiple wild-type Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) IRES (IRES-wt) (Fig. 1B). Similarly, each targeting vector for landing pad 2 contained EMCV IRES-linked rituximab LC, HC and GFP genes. An additional wild-type EMCV IRES was placed downstream of DsRed or GFP gene to activate the expression of (ATG-)Puro and (ATG-)Zeo genes, respectively, after RMCE. The inclusion of DsRed and GFP genes in each targeting vector allowed for quick and reliable analysis of expression homogeneity in stably transfected cell populations using flow cytometry. Single plasmid-integrated stable cell pools expressed the mAb from either of the landing pads, while double plasmid-integrated stable cell pools expressed the mAb from both landing pads. The double stable cell pools exhibited homogenous expression of both DsRed and GFP genes, indicating that the isolation of single cell clone to evaluate the impact of overexpressing transgenes on phenotype could be avoided (Fig. 2B). Subsequently, these stable cell pools were evaluated for specific antibody productivity (qP) in 7-day fed-batch cultures. The two landing pads displayed comparable expression levels when a single plasmid was integrated. When two plasmids were integrated, the total expression levels from the two landing pads were additive (Fig. 2C). This demonstrated that the two loci expressed independently with minimal interference, ensuring the reproducibility of each landing pad's predetermined expression level. These findings established the dMCL as an ideal platform for modulating the expression of multiple genes.
Generation of stable mAb-producing CHO pools expressing various levels of MANII and cGNTIII genes.
To study the impact of different enzyme combinations on the N-glycan profile of rituximab and its effector functions, we generated stable mAb-producing CHO cell pools expressing various levels of MANII and cGNTIII. These stable mAb-producing cell pools were generated through two rounds of sequential RMCE. In the first round, targeting vectors carrying LC and MANII genes were integrated into landing pad 1 (Fig. 1C). This was followed by the integration of targeting vectors carrying HC gene and cGNTIII gene into landing pad 2 (Fig. 1D). The expression levels of MANII and cGNTIII were modulated at three levels: zero (no expression), medium, and high, achieved by using different IRES upstream of the corresponding (Fig. 1C, D). High gene expression level was driven by the wild-type IRES (IRES-wt), while medium expression was controlled by an IRES mutant (IRES-12) which was previously demonstrated to achieve approximately 15% translational strength of IRES-wt. To indicate the expression level of a gene, a subscript was added to the gene name abbreviation. M0, Mm and Mh represented zero, medium and high expression levels of MANII, respectively. Similarly, G0, Gm and Gh denoted the expression levels of cGNTIII as zero, medium, and high, respectively. In total, nine different conditions with varying MANII and cGNTIII expression levels were generated in the stable cell pools.
First, we evaluated the gene expression homogeneity of the stable cell pools using flow cytometry. Compared to the negative control, more than 90% of the cell population in all pools exhibited double positivity for both DsRed and GFP (Fig. 3A), indicating a robust and uniform expression profile from both landing pads. This demonstrated the suitability of these stable pools for producing different mAb variants without the need for clone isolation. Subsequently, we performed RT-PCR analysis of mRNA levels to confirm the successful overexpression of both MANII and cGNTIII in the stably transfected pools (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, western blot analysis was conducted to examine the expression levels of MANII and cGNTIII genes controlled by different IRES elements (Fig. 3C). The relative abundance of each enzyme in the samples was quantified by normalizing the band intensity to the corresponding GAPDH protein. The protein bands corresponding to MANII and cGNTIII were most pronounced in the stable pools expressing MANII and cGNTIII driven by the IRES-wt. Their relative abundance levels ranged from 0.65 to 0.80 for MANII and 0.48-0.78 for cGNTIII. In contrast, the application of IRES-12 on either MANII or cGNTIII effectively reduced their relative expression levels to 0.11-0.19 and 0.16-0.17, respectively (Fig. 3C). Since the relative transcript levels of both MANII and cGNTIII genes were similar in all stable pools (Fig. 3B), the observed variations in protein levels, as detected in the western blot analysis, resulted from the different translational strengths of different IRES elements rather than intrinsic differences in expression capacities of the two landing pads. This further validated the ability to modulate the expression levels of transgenes using appropriate IRES elements.
Production of rituximab with various N-glycan profiles by using CHO cells that co-express cGNTIII and MANII at different protein levels.
The mAb-producing stable pools were characterized for cellular growth, antibody productivity in 7-day fed-batch production, followed by N-glycosylation analysis of the purified antibodies. Supplementary feed was added and culture supernatants were harvested at exponential growth phase to minimize the potential effects of nutrient depletions. The different combinations of MANII and cGNTIII gene expressions did not impact the cell growth in any of the nine stable cell pools, as indicated by the unchanged integrated viable cell density (IVCD) compared to the control culture (Fig. 4A). Overexpressing MANII gene alone caused little change in the specific antibody productivity (qP) compared to the control. However, the productivity was significantly affected in the stable pools expressing the cGNTIII gene alone or in combination with MANII (Fig. 4B). The qP was decreased by half when cGNTIII gene was expressed at medium levels, and high expression of cGNTIII gene further reduced the antibody productivity to approximately 0.2-fold of the control culture. This finding was consistent with a previous study where high-level of GNTIII gene expression showed adverse effects on antibody production yield.
The N-glycosylation profiles of mAbs produced in stable pools with different levels of MANII and cGNTIII were analyzed using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC). Previous studies have consistently reported that mAbs produced in the wild-type CHO cells are predominantly fucosylated with minimal galactosylation and terminal sialylation. Overexpressing cGNTIII in mammalian cells has been shown to result in antibodies with bisecting glycan structures and reduced fucose content. Consistent with these studies, our analysis revealed that the predominant glycan form in the control culture was G0F, a fucosylated species, with minimal detectable bisecting GlcNAc structures (Fig. 4C). Overexpressing MANII alone, regardless of its expression level, produced antibodies with N-glycan profiles similar to those of the control pools. In contrast, overexpression of cGNTIII gene led to the production of many bisecting glycans such as FA2B, FA1BG1, M5A1B, and M5A1BG1, while many of these glycan structures lacked fucose residues (Fig. 4C). Pools expressing high levels of cGNTIII predominantly produced IgGs with M5A1B, a hybrid bisecting non-fucosylated structure, whereas medium expression of cGNTIII produced lower levels of M5A1B glycans and moderate levels of bisecting fucosylated glycans like FA2B, FA2BG1 (Fig. 4C). Quantitatively, high-expressing cGNTIII pools produced 40-60% of IgG1 with hybrid bisecting glycans (M5A1B), while medium-expressing cGNTIII pools produced 10-20% IgGs carrying M5A1B glycans (Fig. 4D). As these hybrid structures lacked fucose residues, the non-fucosylation levels in high-expressing cGNTIII pools increased to nearly 70% compared to 5% in the control pools, whereas medium-level cGNTIII expression resulted in lesser non-fucosylated IgGs, ranging from 20 to 30% (Fig. 4E). Additionally, high-level overexpression of cGNTIII led to a reduction in the galactosylation level of IgG1s (Fig. 4F) due to the shift from FA2BG1 and FA2B toward M5A1B glycans (Fig. 4C). Conversely, medium-level overexpression of cGNTIII did not impair the galactosylation of IgG1s compared to control pools. While MANII overexpression alone did not significantly impact IgG glycan profiles, its co-expression with cGNTIII suppressed the effect of cGNTIII on bisecting glycan, non-fucosylation, and galactosylation in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4C-E). In pools expressing mid-level cGNTIII, the peaks corresponding to bisecting M5A1B, FA2BG1 and FA2B gradually reduced as MANII expression increased (Fig. 4C). The abundance of hybrid bisecting glycans was highest in pools expressing cGNTIII alone, and their levels gradually decreased with increased expression of the MANII gene (Fig. 4D). Among the high-expressing cGNTIII pools, the highest non-fucosylation induction (72%) was observed in the absence of MANII, followed by medium- and high-levels of MANII expression with 68% and 56% non-fucosylation, respectively (Fig. 4E). A similar trend was also observed in pools expressing a medium level of cGNTIII in conjunction with varying levels of MANII gene expression. Furthermore, the reduced galactosylation levels induced by high-level overexpression of cGNTIII gene was reversed by increasing MANII levels in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4F).
The impact of different N-glycosylation profiles on rituximab effector functions.
In the next step, we examined the relationships between the different glycovariant rituximab IgG1s and their Fc-mediated biological functions. The purified antibodies were analyzed for their ability to induce effector cell activation (ECA) against CD20-positive WIL2-S cells (Fig. 5A, B) and CDC against CD20-positive cancer cells RajiB in the presence of human serum (Fig. 5C, D). The levels of ECA induced by different antibody samples were assessed using the ADCC Reporter Bioassay kit. This kit utilizes engineered Jurkat cells that express the FcgammaRIIIa receptor and contain a nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) response element driving the expression of firefly luciferase as effector cells. Instead of directly measuring target cell killing, which defines ADCC, the assay kit evaluates the activation of the ADCC mechanism of action pathway. Therefore, we utilized the term ECA instead of ADCC potency as a more accurate measure to reflect the results. A previous study demonstrated a strong correlation between the biological activity determined using this assay kit and the classic peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)-based ADCC assay. Consequently, the ECA measured by the ADCC Reporter Bioassay kit serves as a reliable indicator of ADCC potency in different antibody samples, providing valuable insights into their efficacy.
Overexpressing MANII gene alone did not affect the ECA function of IgG1, regardless of its expression level (Fig. 5A, B). This result was expected since the mAbs produced in these pools exhibited similar glycan profiles to the control (Fig. 4C). In contrast, moderate-level overexpression of the cGNTIII gene significantly improved ECA potency of IgG1 by two-fold, as indicated by a 50% reduction in EC50 values (Fig. 5B). Rituximabs produced in pools with high-level expression of cGNTIII showed a leftward and upward shift in the ECA dose-response curves (Fig. 5A), indicating improved ECA potency and maximal efficacy. The ECA EC50 value markedly reduced to a range of 2.01-4.30 ng/mL, which were 15- to 7-fold improvement, respectively, compared to the value of 30 ng/mL in unmodified antibodies (Fig. 5B). Notedly, cGNTIII could improve ECA functions of IgG1 independent of different expression levels of MANII gene. Previous studies have reported that antibodies carrying non-fucosylated glycans display significantly higher ADCC potency, up to 100-fold, compared to their fucosylated counterparts. The observed lower levels of ECA in our study could potentially be attributed to two factors: either incomplete removal of fucose in our antibody samples or the utilization of different assay methodologies.
While medium or high levels of MANII overexpression alone resulted in little changes to the CDC function of Rituximab IgG1, a slight rightward shift in the CDC dose-response curves was observed with medium expression of cGNTIII, followed by a more pronounced shift with high expression of this enzyme (Fig. 5C). At the saturating dose (20 microg/mL), high-level overexpression of cGNTIII alone drastically reduced the maximal efficacy of Rituximab CDC by four-fold compared to the control samples (Fig. 5D). However, the weakened CDC functions were mitigated by increasing the expression of MANII gene in the high-expressing cGNTIII pools, resulting in only a two-fold and 0.75-fold reduction in the max CDC of IgG1 produced by Mm + Gh and Mh + Gh pools, respectively (Fig. 5D). Co-expression of MANII and cGNTIII genes at high levels produced rituximab IgG1 with the highest ECA potency and only approximately a 20% reduction in CDC activity (Fig. 5B, D).
To examine the relationship between glycosylation outcomes and the two Fc-mediated effector functions of IgG1, we plotted the levels of non-fucosylation, hybrid bisect, galactosylation of mAbs produced by CHO pools expressing different levels of MANII and cGNTIII against their corresponding ECA and CDC activities, respectively (Fig. 5E). Previous studies have reported that a high proportion of non-fucosylated IgG1 enhances ADCC functions. Consistently, we observed a strong correlation between Fc non-fucosylation and ECA efficacy (R2 of 0.86), whereby increased non-fucosylation levels resulted in reduced ECA EC50 values (Fig. 5E left panels). As expected, ECA efficacy also strongly correlated with the percentage of hybrid-bisect structures (M5A1B) (R2 of 0.84), as a significant proportion of these structures in our samples lacked fucose residues (Fig. 4C), directly contributing to the non-fucosylation outcome. Hybrid structures has been reported to impair CDC activity of mAbs. Similarly, we found that CDC maximal efficacy correlated strongly with both hybrid-bisect and non-fucosylation levels (R2 of 0.88 and 0.86, respectively) (Fig. 5E right panels). While Fc galacosylation showed only a weak correlation with ECA efficacy (R2 of 0.46), this variable exhibited a high correlation with CDC (R2 of 0.83). These findings align with previous studies highlighting the role of Fc galactosylation in enhancing CDC activation.
