Evaluation of Exogenous siRNA Addition as a Metabolic Engineering Tool for Modifying Biopharmaceuticals.
Traditional metabolic engineering approaches, including homologous recombination, zinc finger nucleases, and short hairpin RNA (shRNA), have previously been employed to generate biologics with specific characteristics that improve efficacy, potency, and safety. An alternative approach is to exogenously add soluble small interfering RNA (siRNA) duplexes, formulated with a cationic lipid, directly to cells grown in shake flasks or bioreactors, This approach has the following potential advantages : no cell line development required, ability to tailor mRNA silencing by adjusting siRNA concentration, simultaneous silencing of multiple target genes, and potential temporal control of down regulation of target gene expression. In this study, we demonstrate proof of concept of the siRNA feeding approach as a metabolic engineering tool in the context of increasing monoclonal antibody afucosylation. First, potent siRNA duplexes targeting fut8 and gmds were dosed into shake flasks with cells that express an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody. Dose response studies demonstrated the ability to titrate the silencing effect. Furthermore, siRNA addition resulted in no deleterious effects on cell growth, final protein titer, or specific productivity. In bioreactors, antibodies produced by cells following siRNA treatment exhibited improved functional characteristics compared to antibodies from untreated cells, including increased levels of afucosylation (63%), a 17-fold improvement in FCgRIIIa binding, and an increase in specific cell lysis by up to 30%, as determined in an ADCC assay. In addition, standard purification procedures effectively cleared the exogenously added siRNA and transfection agent. Moreover, no differences were observed when other key product quality structural attributes were compared to untreated controls. These results establish that exogenous addition of siRNA represents a potentially novel metabolic engineering tool to improve biopharmaceutical function and quality that can complement existing metabolic engineering methods.
RESULTS.
No significant effects on growth/productivity due to siRNA addition.
Based on a proprietary dosing strategy, CHO cells, expressing an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody in shake flask cultures, were transfected directly with increasing concentrations of FUT8 and GMDS siRNA duplexes up to 50 picomoles/106 cells. Growth profiles, final titer, and final specific productivities (i.e., Final titer / Final IVCC) are summarized in Figure 1. After normalization of cell concentration to the initial culture volume in order to account for differences in feed and transfection volume (i.e., cell concentration x culture volume / initial volume), growth profiles for all conditions were similar with maximum cell concentration occurring on day 9. Average maximum cell concentrations for all cultures were also consistently between 18 - 19 x 106 cells/mL. Thus, time course profiles of viable cell concentration for the range of siRNA concentrations tested indicated no deleterious effects on growth due to increasing siRNA concentration. Final titer and specific productivities varied from 84 - 100 microg/mL and 0.94 - 1.11 picograms/cell days, respectively. T-tests of final titer and specific productivity, comparing each dose group to control, were not significant (p > 0.05), which suggests no significant effect of siRNA concentration on antibody titer or specific productivity. These results demonstrate that siRNA transfection into cells grown in shake flasks does not affect cell growth characteristics or protein productivity.
mRNA silencing is dose dependent and titratable.
The effect of FUT8 and GMDS siRNA on silencing of fut8 and gmds expression was evaluated using qPCR on daily samples from shake flask cultures with increasing concentrations of siRNA. Time course profiles of both fut8 and gmds expression are outlined in Figures 2A and 2B, respectively. For both genes, initial expression levels for siRNA treated cultures were lower than for the cells only control condition due to the transfection of their respective seed cultures. For all siRNA concentrations tested, fut8 expression, in general, decreased until day 2, increased on day 3, and then gradually decreased throughout the rest of the culture. Similarly, gmds expression decreased on day 1, increased until day 3 and then maintained this level until day 9. After day 9, gmds expression decreased and remained at low levels through day 12. These variations in expression profiles between fut8 and gmds are most likely due to differences in target message levels and turnover rates .
Despite the variability in qPCR data, a decrease in gene expression with increasing siRNA concentration can be observed throughout the cultures for both fut8 and gmds expression. To further elucidate the potential relationship between siRNA concentration and gene silencing, an integral analysis was performed for both fut8 and gmds mRNA expression profiles to determine the cumulative mRNA remaining for the various siRNA concentrations (Figure 2C). The results indicate that silencing is dose dependent between 0 - 10 picomoles/106 cells for both siRNA with saturation (~16% and ~25% of cells only for fut8 and gmds expression, respectively) occurring after siRNA concentrations greater than 10 picomoles/106 cells. This result suggests that the desired level of mRNA knockdown can be achieved by choosing siRNA concentration appropriately and that the optimal siRNA concentration for silencing both fut8 and gmds expression is between 5-10 picomoles/106 cells.
fut8 and gmds mRNA expression is reduced in bioreactors.
To demonstrate the benefit of exogenous siRNA addition in bioreactors, CHO cells expressing anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody were grown in bench scale bioreactors and dosed based on conditions identified in shake flask cultures. Similar to shake flask cultures, siRNA addition and transfection do not affect growth, as shown by no significant difference in integral viable cell concentrations for both siRNA treated and control cultures throughout culture duration (Figure 3A). Furthermore, titer is also not affected [siRNA treated (n=3) - 157 +- 4 mg/L and untreated controls (n=3) - 161 +- 1 mg/L]. Next, fut8 and gmds mRNA expression were determined for each day of culture via qPCR (Figure 3B). The results demonstrate significant silencing of both genes throughout the bioreactor runs, with fut8 and gmds expression below 20 and 30%, respectively, of untreated cells only control levels for most of culture duration. Interestingly, the expression patterns for both genes are very similar until day 6. The increase in expression on days 3 and 6 is most likely due to the inability of a transfection frequency of 3 days to maintain silencing with the substantial cell growth occurring at this stage. Thus, there may be an opportunity for further improvement of silencing by increasing transfection frequency during this culture stage. After day 6, fut8 expression continued to decrease with time to below 10% of control levels, while gmds expression remained relatively constant between 20-30% for the remainder of culture duration.
For comparison to expression patterns in shake flask cultures, cumulative mRNA knockdown was calculated for both genes in the bioreactor experiments (Figure 3C). Cumulative mRNA remaining for fut8 and gmds were 14 and 23%, respectively, of cell only controls which is very similar to averages for fut8 and gmds cumulative mRNA remaining in shake flasks (16 and 25%, respectively, of cell only controls). This result demonstrates reproducibility in silencing between shake flask and bioreactor conditions.
FUT8 and GMDS siRNA specifically increase levels of core afucosylation without affecting other product quality attributes.
Antibody was purified from harvests of siRNA treated and control bioreactor runs and examined for glycosylation profile as shown in Figure 4A. Addition of FUT8 and GMDS siRNA dramatically increased total levels of core afucosylation of antibody to 63% compared to 0% for purified material from control bioreactor harvests. For the agalactosylated form (G0), 59% of purified antibody from siRNA treated cultures was found without core fucose, compared to 88% with core fucose for control cultures. For total G1 forms, there was no afucosylated G1 form identified with control antibody, compared to 4% in siRNA treated material. For the completely galactosylated form (G2), roughly 50% of siRNA treated material was afucosylated. These data demonstrate that core afucosylation was dramatically enhanced with FUT8 and GMDS siRNA addition.
To determine if there were any other effects on product quality due to siRNA addition, product quality attributes including N-terminal and C-terminal modifications, oxidation, deamidation, and disulfide bond formation were examined. A summary of all the tested product quality attributes is shown in Figures 4B-D. Importantly, no significant differences were observed between purified material from siRNA treated and untreated control bioreactors for modifications to the N-terminal pyroglutamate, C-terminal lysine, and deamidation of asparagines. In addition, disulfide linkages were confirmed to occur at the appropriate sites and to be identical between conditions (data not shown). A slight increase in oxidation of methionine 34 and methionine 81 was observed from the antibody produced from siRNA treated cultures; however, this result is most likely due to sample handling as the buffer/conditions of these samples were not optimized for long term storage and manipulation. Furthermore, FUT8 and GMD siRNA and transfection lipid concentrations were determined for samples from various stages of the antibody purification procedure to demonstrate efficient removal of potential process-related contaminants. No significant levels above the background levels observed in control cultures were detected for any of these components after SP Sepharose purification (Figure 5). These data strongly suggest that siRNA addition should have no effect on a biologics manufacturing process, other than the intended target(s) silencing effect(s).
siRNA treated bioreactors produce antibody with improved functional characteristics.
A predominant effect of core afucosylation on an antibody is to improve binding with FcgammaRIIIa which then promotes increased ADCC . Thus, purified antibody from both siRNA treated and control bioreactor runs were further subjected to FcgammaRIIIa binding and ADCC assays to determine if there indeed was improved functionality with antibodies produced from siRNA treated bioreactors. As shown in Figure 6A, antibody purified from siRNA treated bioreactor runs exhibited significantly higher binding to FcgammaRIIIa compared to antibody produced from control bioreactors. Peak OD450 for antibody produced from siRNA treated runs were roughly 17-fold higher than material from control runs. Moreover, significantly less FcgammaRIIIa was required (~500-fold) for material generated from siRNA treated cultures to produce the same peak binding activity generated from material derived from control cultures.
The ADCC assay also demonstrated improved functionality with antibody generated from siRNA treated bioreactors (Figure 6B). Antibody from siRNA treated bioreactors exhibited roughly 10-30% higher specific cell lysis at any given antibody concentration. Additionally, peak specific cell lysis was also higher (66%) relative to antibody from control bioreactor runs (53%). Furthermore, to achieve a specific cell lysis of 50%, approximately 25-fold less antibody produced from siRNA treated cultures was required compared to control. In conjunction with FcgammaRIIIa binding assay data, these results demonstrate that addition of FUT8 and GMDS siRNA directly to bioreactor runs can significantly improve ADCC of a biologic without requiring any cell line engineering and thus, provides proof of concept that exogenous siRNA addition can modify a biopharmaceutical for enhanced functionality.
