A control strategy to investigate the relationship between specific productivity and high-mannose glycoforms in CHO cells.
The integration of physiological knowledge into process control strategies is a cornerstone for the improvement of biopharmaceutical cell culture technologies. The present contribution investigates the applicability of specific productivity as a physiological control parameter in a cell culture process producing a monoclonal antibody (mAb) in CHO cells. In order to characterize cell physiology, the on-line oxygen uptake rate (OUR) was monitored and the time-resolved specific productivity was calculated as physiological parameters. This characterization enabled to identify the tight link between the deprivation of tyrosine and the decrease in cell respiration and in specific productivity. Subsequently, this link was used to control specific productivity by applying different feeding profiles. The maintenance of specific productivity at various levels enabled to identify a correlation between the rate of product formation and the relative abundance of high-mannose glycoforms. An increase in high mannose content was assumed to be the result of high specific productivity. Furthermore, the high mannose content as a function of cultivation pH and specific productivity was investigated in a design of experiment approach. This study demonstrated how physiological parameters could be used to understand interactions between process parameters, physiological parameters, and product quality attributes.
Electronic supplementary material.
The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s00253-016-7380-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Results.
The first goal of the study was to gain real-time information on cell physiology by monitoring the oxygen uptake of the culture on-line and to link this physiological parameter to the rate of product formation. The ultimate goal was then to develop a control strategy including specific productivity as a parameter and to investigate interactions between specific productivity and the glycosylation pattern of the recombinant product.
On-line detection of the dynamics of physiological parameters during switches between nutrient limitation and excess.
A typical fed-batch cell culture process was performed with cell line A, using bolus feed additions every second day. OUR was monitored on-line in order to gain information on the respiratory activity of the cells (Fig. 1). On the fifth cultivation day, a temperature shift was performed leading to a decrease in the oxygen uptake of the culture. Another steep decrease in OUR was observed after the seventh cultivation day, which could not be related to any processing events. Spent broth analysis revealed that the decrease in the respiratory activity was linked to the exhaustion of tyrosine in the cultivation broth. The concentration of all other amino acids remained above the limit of detection of the measurement method during the whole cultivation (concentrations of two other aromatic amino acids which also frequently show deprivation in cell culture processes due to their low solubility in cultivation media are shown in Fig. 1). After the addition of the bolus feed (which contained tyrosine) on the ninth cultivation day, the respiratory activity of the cells recovered and OUR showed an increase for several hours. However, as tyrosine was depleted again, similar to the previously described events, OUR showed repeatedly a decline and remained on a low level until the next feeding event.
Whereas the investigation of product titer did not indicate variations in product formation during the switch between nutrient limitation and excess, the analysis of qP revealed a steep decrease in the rate of product formation in the nutrient-limited phases (Fig. 1). However, similar to OUR, qP recovered after the feeding events. Taken together, the exhaustion of tyrosine led to a decrease in the oxygen uptake (OUR) as well as in the productivity (qP) of the culture. The main benefit of OUR monitoring was the real-time detection of the changes in cell physiology.
Implementation of a feeding strategy to increase qP based on real-time physiological information.
Based on the above-discussed observations, an experiment was designed where a supplementary feed containing tyrosine (and other essential amino acids) was added to the cultivation based on the OUR signal in order to overcome nutrient limitations. The experiment was performed with two different cell lines. The supplementary feed was initiated after observing the first decrease of the OUR signal in the respective cultivation, and it was terminated at the next bolus feeding event (Fig. 2). Moreover, control cultivations were performed to obtain a similar physiological profile as shown in the previous experiment.
Interestingly, the first decrease in OUR was observed 1 day earlier in the cultivations with cell line B (day 7) compared to the cell line A cultures (day 8). Spent broth analysis (data not shown) revealed that this phenomenon was a consequence of the earlier exhaustion of tyrosine, probably due to the higher substrate uptake rates of cell line B. However, the on-line monitoring of OUR enabled to detect the earlier onset of nutrient limitations and to maintain a high specific productivity by starting the supplementary feed 1 day earlier as in the cell line A cultivation.
After the bolus feeding events, the OUR of the control cultivation ("ctrl") with cell line A was monitored, and when the decline in OUR was detected, the supplementary feed of the supplemented cultivations ("suppl") was started again for both cell lines. This strategy allowed to avoid nutrient limitation in the supplemented cultivation of cell line A from the first start of the supplementary feed until the end of the cultivation (data not shown). However, a decrease in OUR was observed in the supplemented cultivation of cell line B after the 11th cultivation day, suggesting the exhaustion of a further substance which was not added with the supplementary feed. The spent broth analysis revealed the exhaustion of leucine in this cultivation, which was indeed not added to the supplementary feed. The next step of process development would be to subsequently adjust the composition of the supplementary feed to the metabolic requirements of cell line B.
The time-resolved analysis of qP revealed that product formation rate followed the pattern of the OUR signals (Fig. 2). In the control cultivations, both cell lines showed high variations in qP, in accordance with the changes in OUR. In contrast, the supplemented cultures of both cell lines A and B showed a high and nearly constant qP after the initiation of the supplementary feeding. Thus, the real-time adjusted feeding strategy enabled us to generate different qP patterns with two different cell lines in a single experiment. The detected differences in cell respiration as well as in qP suggested that the cells experienced a very different physiological status in the ctrl and in the suppl cultivations. Whereas the control cultivations showed repeatedly physiological changes in nutrient limitation and excess, the addition of a supplementary feed maintained amino acid concentrations and a stable physiological status in the supplemented cultivations.
Beside OUR monitoring, capacitance measurement, another on-line tool, was also performed to investigate changes in the dielectric properties of the cells during the cultivations. The capacitance signals measured at 580-kHz (C580) frequency showed a linear correlation to the at-line measured VCD values for both cell lines in the growth phase of the cultivations (Fig. 3a, b). The linear correlation between the capacitance signals measured at one frequency and cell density indicated a constant physiological status in this process phase. Interestingly, the capacitance signal showed a similar pattern to OUR in the control cultivations, indicating major changes in the dielectric properties of the cells as a response on the repeated switches between nutrient limitation and excess.
In order to gain insight into cell metabolism, specific lactate production rate and specific OUR (qO2) were calculated. Both cell lines switched to lactate uptake after the temperature shift performed on the fifth cultivation day (Fig. 3c). Interestingly, cell line B showed an oscillation in lactate metabolism in accordance with the phases of nutrient excess and limitation. Whereas the cells produced lactate after bolus feeding events, they switched to lactate consumption after nutrient exhaustion. Cell line A showed a different pattern indicating that the effect of nutrient limitation on lactate metabolism may be cell line dependent. The calculated qO2 values showed an oscillation in the respiratory activity of the cells (Fig. 3d), in accordance with the OUR pattern. Interestingly, the qO2 values of the two cell lines differed in a great extent, indicating differences in the metabolic activity of the two cell lines (vide supra).
Specific productivity was plotted against qO2 in order to investigate the link between respiratory activity and product formation (Fig. 4a). A linear relationship was observed, verifying the tight physiological link between cell respiration and the rate of product formation in our system of interest.
An important CQA, product glycosylation:which is an N-linked biantennary oligosaccharide structure in the Fc region of the antibody:was analyzed at several time points of the cultivations. The seven most abundant glycoforms were investigated: an afucosylated high-mannose glycoform containing five mannose residues (M5) and further six glycoforms labeled according to the number of galactose in the core structure (G0, G1, and G2); each of them occurred in both fucosylated and non-fucosylated forms. The relative abundance of the glycoforms was calculated in order to investigate their distribution as a function of process time. Beside the cell line-dependent difference, a process-dependent difference was also observed in the glycosylation patterns. Generally, the relative abundance of high mannose (Fig. 4b) and other afucosylated glycoforms (G0, G1, and G2 on Fig. S1) was higher in the supplemented experiments. Both cell lines showed an increasing M5 pattern with very similar values until the tenth cultivation day in the respective control and supplemented cultivations (Fig. 4b). However, the relative abundance of M5 high-mannose glycoform was higher in both supplemented experiments, suggesting that the differences in qP patterns led to differences in product quality. The successful adjustment of qP enabled to identify a link between specific productivity and high mannose content. In order to investigate this link further, another experiment was conducted with cell line A, where qP was controlled at two different levels (vide infra).
Application of dynamic feed profiles to adjust qP to different levels.
In this experiment, feed media were added continuously to two independent cultivations performed with cell line A. The dynamic feed ramps were initiated on the eighth cultivation day based on previous observations (vide supra) to avoid any nutrient limitations. In order to achieve a high qP, both standard and supplementary feed media were added to the cultivation broth in experiment "HI." While, in experiment "LO," only the standard feed medium was used at a lower feeding rate to obtain a lower qP value. Moreover, the feeding rate was reduced on the 11th cultivation day in the LO cultivation in order to trigger a decrease in qP in the last two cultivation days (Fig. 5a). We found that both the on-line determined OUR and the calculated qP were higher in experiment HI, indicating that the proposed strategy to control qP by adjusting the feeding rate was successful. Moreover, both OUR and qP immediately followed the dynamic change in the feeding rate in experiment LO on the 11th cultivation day, suggesting a strong link between feeding rate, the respiratory activity, and product formation in the nutrient-limited environment. The correlation of qO2 and qP (Fig. 5b) in this experiment demonstrated that:similar to the bolus-fed cultivations:the rate of product formation is tightly linked to the metabolic activity of the cells in the continuous feed environment.
The relative M5 value plotted as a function of process time showed a distinct response on the level of specific productivity (Fig. 5c). When the productivity of the two cultivations diverged to a great extent from each other, the relative M5 values increased in experiment HI reaching much higher values than in experiment LO. The relative abundance of G0F glycoform showed the opposite trend, and the distribution of all other glycoforms remained very similar in both cultivations (Fig. S2). These results suggest that the abundance of high-mannose glycoforms is higher when qP is increased. As the abundance of different glycoforms was determined for the whole product population in the samples, accumulation effects may render the interpretation of glycosylation results difficult. For example, in the cultivations with low qP, a constant M5 value can be a result of the negligible effect of the low product amount on the distribution of glycoforms in the whole product population. In contrast, the high amount of new product molecules at high qP influences the distribution of glycoforms in the respective samples to a great extent. In order to eliminate this accumulation effect, we introduced a novel calculation form by setting up a mass balance for the time ranges between two glycoform measurements (Eq. 1). Using this equation, we determined the relative abundance of high-mannose glycoforms in the product population which was expressed in the investigated time range (Delta relative M5). As shown on Fig. 6, the calculated values indicate that the abundance of M5 glycoforms is increased by high qP values, implying the effect of the rate of product formation on product glycosylation.
Application of qP as a physiological factor in a multivariate experimental design.
The benefits of using physiological parameters as experimental factors in DoE designs have already been demonstrated in microbial process development (Wechselberger et al.). As a proof of concept for cell culture processes, a DoE approach involving specific productivity as an experimental factor was conducted in our study (Fig. 7a). Specific productivity was controlled at three levels ("high," "center point," and "low") in the last three cultivation days by applying different pre-defined continuous feeding profiles (Fig. S3a). The second experimental factor was chosen to be the pH shift setpoint, as pH was shown to affect monoclonal antibody (mAb) glycosylation (Jedrzejewski et al.). The center point value of the pH shift setpoints was 7.05.
We found that the experimental factors did not affect VCD (Fig. 7b); thus, the implementation of a cell density-dependent feeding rate was not necessary. The cultivations showed a similar qP profile until the eighth cultivation day (Fig. 7c). After the initiation of the continuous feed profiles, the specific productivity curves diverged from each other. The two "qP high" cultivations showed a high specific productivity, as expected, until the end of the experiment. In the center point experiments, qP started to decrease after the eighth cultivation day and then remained on a constant level in the last three days of the experiments. The highly similar qP profile of the three center point experiments proved the reproducibility of the control strategy (Fig. S3b). Interestingly, the specific productivity in the qP low experiments showed a pH-dependent behavior. Whereas qP started to decrease immediately after the initiation of the continuous feeding in the "without pH shift, qP low" cultivation, specific productivity remained high until the tenth cultivation day in the "pH shift, qP low" run and decreased to a low level only in the last three days of the experiment. The reason behind the later decrease of product formation rate is the lower metabolic activity in pH-shifted conditions and a subsequently later onset of nutrient limitation in the "pH shift, qP low" cultivation. Indeed, the spent broth analysis verified that tyrosine exhausted on the ninth cultivation day in the cultivation without pH shift and only on the 11th cultivation day in the "pH shift, qP low" cultivation. However, qP decreased to similar values in both qP low runs, enabling the use of specific productivity as a DoE factor independent of pH in the last three days of the cultivations.
The relationship of respiratory activity and specific productivity also showed a pH-dependent pattern (Fig. 7d). Although the values of qO2 and qP followed a linear correlation in all runs, the cultivations without pH shift formed a different cluster on the qO2-qP plot from those where pH shift was performed. This suggested that the respiratory activity of the cells is dependent on pH. This was also confirmed by the OUR and qO2 profiles (Fig. 7e, f), where the values of the pH-shifted cultivations run lower between the time point of the pH shift (third cultivation day) and the initiation of the continuous feeds (eighth cultivation day). Nutrient availability also affected the respiratory activity of the cells. Whereas qO2 increased in the qP high cultivations after the eighth cultivation day, the qP low cultivations, in which the feeding rate was low, showed a decline in qO2 after the initiation of the continuous feed profile. However, the relationship between qO2 and qP was only affected by pH shift and retained its linear nature at the different qP levels of the DoE experiment.
In order to investigate the effect of the experimental factors on cell metabolism, the YLac/Glc variable was investigated (Fig. 8a). Similar to previous observations with the same cell line (Zalai et al.), the shift in pH to 6.9 on the third cultivation day immediately affected the ratio of lactate and glucose uptake rates. Interestingly, the metabolic shift to lactate consumption was also dependent on the feeding rate in the cultivations without pH shift. Whereas the cells did not switch to lactate uptake in the cultivation with a high feeding rate, lactate consumption was observed after the eighth cultivation day in the without pH shift, qP low. Osmolality has been shown to affect high mannose content in cell culture processes (Shi and Goudar). In this study, osmolality profiles clustered according to the setpoint of the pH shift, however did not show a response on the qP setpoint (Fig. 8b). Thus, the effect of qP on high mannose content was not a consequence of interactions with osmolality effects.
High mannose content was determined in the DoE cultivations in order to investigate the effect of the experimental factors on the accumulation of this pre-mature glycoform. The center point runs showed very similar high mannose profiles during the whole cultivation period (Fig. 9a). Whereas the two cultivations without pH shift showed the same profile as the center point runs, the cultivations with a pH shift to 6.9 showed elevated relative M5 values already on the tenth day of the cultivation. However, the high mannose of these cultivations diverged in the last day of the experiment, according to the qP setpoint. The relative M5 values in the two cultivations with pH shift were comparable to the values observed in the HI and LO experiments (Fig. 9b), verifying our previous observations that the increase of qP leads to the accumulation of pre-mature glycoforms. However, the high mannose content remained low in the "without pH shift, qP high" cultivation, indicating that the phenomenon is pH-dependent. Taken together, the DoE experimental design enabled the identification of an interaction effect between pH and qP, which leads to elevated high mannose levels in the "pH shift, qP high" experimental point.
In order to involve qP as an experimental factor in the statistical evaluation of the DoE data, average specific productivity in the last three cultivation days was calculated (Fig. 9c). The values in the qP low and the center point runs showed only a small difference, leading to an asymmetric design. Consequently, the fitted mathematical model showed a low Q2 value (0.52) as an indicator of the poor prediction capability. However, the statistical analysis identified the interaction term of pH and qP as a significant model coefficient to explain relationship between the experimental factors and final high mannose content (Fig. 9d). This result verified the above-discussed pH dependence of the effect of qP on high mannose content.
