Metabolic characterization of a CHO cell size increase phase in fed-batch cultures.
Normally, the growth profile of a CHO cell fed-batch process can be divided into two main phases based on changes in cell concentration, being an exponential growth phase and a stationary (non-growth) phase. In this study, an additional phase is observed during which the cell division comes to a halt but the cell growth continues in the form of an increase in cell size. The cell size increase (SI) phase occurs between the exponential proliferation phase (also called the number increase or NI phase) and the stationary phase. During the SI phase, the average volume and dry weight per cell increase threefold linearly with time. The average mAb specific productivity per cell increases linearly with the cell volume and therefore is on average two times higher in the SI phase than in the NI phase. The specific essential amino acids consumption rates per cell remain fairly constant between the NI and the SI phase, which agrees with the similar biomass production rate per cell between these two phases. Accumulation of fatty acids and formation of lipid droplets in the cells are observed during the SI phase, indicating that the fatty acids synthesis rate exceeds the demand for the synthesis of membrane lipids. A metabolic comparison between NI and SI phase shows that the cells with a larger size produce more mAb per unit of O2 and nutrient consumed, which can be used for further process optimization.
Electronic supplementary material.
The online version of this article (10.1007/s00253-017-8531-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Results.
Cell growth.
Based on cell concentration, the growth curve of CHO cells normally consists of an exponential cell proliferation phase, a stationary phase, and a death phase. In this study, an additional cell size increase phase is reported (Fig. 1), resulting in four phases for this CHO cell fed-batch process being: (i) A phase in which the cell concentration increases exponentially (day 0 to 4) and the volume per cell remains constant (the number increase or NI phase). (ii) A phase in which the cell size increases nearly linear (R 2 = 0.99) in time (day 4 to 8) and the cell concentration stays approximately constant (the size increase or SI phase). (iii) A short stationary phase (day 8 to 10) in which the biomass concentration remains approximately constant and the culture viability is always higher than 80%. (iv) A death phase (day 10 to 12) in which the viability declines and is always lower than 80%. Since the observed change from growth in cell concentration to growth in cell size has not been reported in regular fed-batch processes and can have consequences for process development, this study mainly focuses on the NI phase and the SI phase.
Metabolites profiles.
To identify possible limiting or inhibitory compounds and to characterize metabolism in the different phases, extracellular concentrations of substrates and products were measured. Concentrations of extracellular glucose, lactate, and ammonium are shown in Fig. 2a. The 45% glucose solution is added on culture day 3, 7, 8, and 10 when the glucose concentration is lower than 18 mM, as described in materials and methods. Next to this, the ActiCHO feed A&B are added daily. On the days other than 3, 7, 8, and 10, the increases in culture glucose concentrations were caused by the addition of ActiCHO feed A only. Using this feeding strategy, the glucose concentration in each bioreactor stayed above 5 mM throughout the fed-batch cultures. Furthermore, since the ActiCHO feed A also contains glucose, the culture glucose concentration after feeding can be higher than 28 mM. Lactate is produced during the NI phase (day 0-4) until nearly 30 mM and is consumed at a lower rate during the SI phase and stationary phase (day 4-10), followed by production again during the death phase (day 10-12). Ammonium concentrations stay constant at values lower than 5 mM until culture day 7 and start to increase gradually thereafter up to 15 mM on day 12. Production of formic acid (up to 7 mM at day 10) and acetic acid (up to 15 mM at day 10) are observed in the cultures (Fig. 2b). Succinic acid is present in the basal medium and is consumed during the culture (Fig. 2b). None of the essential amino acids is depleted during the fed-batch cultures (Fig. 2c). The gradual increase in their concentrations after day 3 is caused by the feed addition, since these essential amino acids cannot be made by CHO cells from the other compounds. Note that for some of the non-essential amino acids the cell may not be able to synthesize them fast enough to support growth making them essential for a robust process, consequently, they also need to be present in the medium and feed. For some of the non-essential amino acids, asparagine, glutamine, and cyst(e)ine (cysteine is measured in the form of cystine in this study) are consumed during the NI phase and are depleted around day 4 (Fig. 2d). Glutamine, which is not present in the feed, is produced after day 7. Cyst(e)ine concentration increases after day 5. The complete set of raw data for the extracellular compounds and the composition of both feeds can be found in ESM 2.
Cell-specific rates vs volume-specific rates.
In order to obtain insight into the relationship between cell volume and the specific consumption and production rates of nutrients and products, including mAb, their metabolic rates were calculated and compared in this section. The rates are calculated on a per cell and per cellular volume basis for the NI and the SI phase, respectively.
The average specific mAb productivities calculated based on cell-volume and cell-number are shown in Fig. 3a. Average specific productivity expressed per cell is twofold higher (15 compared to 7.5 pg x cell-1 x day-1) in the SI phase compared to the NI phase. When calculated per cell volume, the specific productivities in the two phases are not significantly different, indicating that the mAb productivity of a cell is related to its volume. This becomes clearer when the productivity per cell is plotted against the cellular volume, which results in a linear correlation between average cell volume and specific mAb productivity as shown in Fig. 3c. The specific glucose consumption based on cell number shows only a slight decrease (4.5 to 4.1 mumol x 10-6 cells x day-1) from the NI to the SI phase. The decrease is larger (1.9 to 0.8 mumol x mm-3 x day-1) when the rate is calculated based on cell volume. Thus, the specific glucose consumption rate is related more to the cell number and less to the cell volume. Lactate is produced during the NI phase at a high rate (3 mumol x 10-6 cells x day-1; 1.3 mumol x mm-3 x day-1) and is consumed during the SI phase at a much lower rate (0.25 mumol x 10-6 cells x day-1; 0.05 mumol x mm-3 x day-1) (Fig. 4). The cell number-specific and cell volume-specific consumption rates of ten essential amino acids during the NI and the SI phase are shown in Fig. 5. When the consumption rates are expressed based on cell number, six out of ten essential amino acids do not show a significant difference between the two phases. However, as the cell volume increases in the SI phase, the cell volume-specific consumption rates of all the essential amino acids show significant drops. This implies that the consumption of the essential amino acids is more related to the cell number than to the cell volume.
Biomass composition.
The composition of biomass with respect to protein, fatty acids, carbohydrate, RNA, and DNA is shown in Table 1 as a percentage of the cell dry weight (DW). The amino acid composition of the cellular protein and the fatty acids composition of the lipids stayed constant during the fed-batch culture (the average values are given in ESM 3 Table S1 and S2). The cell DW increased linearly with the cell volume over the culture time, from 770 pg/cell on day 4 to 2440 pg/cell on day 10 (Table 1). Furthermore, the relative composition of the biomass shifted during the cultures. The protein content in the biomass decreased from 74.5 to 67% whereas the fatty acid content increased from 7.2 to 10.3% from culture day 4 until culture day 10. A microscopic image (Fig. 6) shows a clear accumulation of lipid droplets during the SI phase. These droplets are not composed of triacylglyceride (TAG) (data not shown). The sum of all biomass components adds up to around 90% of the cell DW.
Flux balance analysis.
Geometric flux balance analysis (FBA) is carried out to further investigate the shift of the overall metabolic flux distribution from the NI phase to the SI phase. The FBA results for both phases are summarized in Fig. 7. The metabolic fluxes are expressed per cell because the uptake rates of essential amino acids and glucose and the biomass formation rate are constant on a per cell basis in the NI and SI phase. On a per volume basis rates are continuously decreasing during the SI phase due to the increase in cell volume. During the SI phase, the change in biomass content per cell and in biomass composition is considered in the biomass equation in the FBA model. The flux variability analysis (FVA) shows that the flux variability results in overlapping flux values with respect to the two different phases for the PPP as well as for the TCA cycle, as indicated by the red numbers in Fig. 7. This means the value of these fluxes cannot be identified as being different between the two phases, which is further addressed in the discussion. During the NI phase, high fluxes through lactate and alanine production are calculated. During the SI phase, lactate metabolic flux shifts to a consumption and the flux from pyruvate to alanine decreases. Higher O2 consumption and CO2 production fluxes (~1.5-fold higher) are calculated for the SI phase, which agrees with the higher ATP generation flux in the mitochondria. The ATP is transported to the cytosol through ATP/ADP translocases and used for biomass and product synthesis, and for cell maintenance. The cellular protein formation rate decreases by 25% whereas the mAb formation increases by 250% during the SI phase. In the NI phase, mAb production is about 1.5% of the total protein synthesized, whereas in the SI phase this becomes 5%. In the SI phase, the fatty acids synthesis flux is slightly higher and the flux from AcCoA to acetic acid is also higher than in the NI phase. For the complete result of FBA and FVA, see ESM 1.
mAb N-glycan composition.
The glycosylation profile of a mAb is routinely analyzed throughout process development to ensure process consistency. In order to investigate whether or not the mAb glycosylation changes as cell size increases, the N-glycan composition of the produced mAb is measured on culture day 5, 8 and 12 (Fig. 8). The relative composition of N-glycans does not show differences between culture day 5 and 8, indicating that the mAb glycosylation does not change as cell size increases. Differences on day 12 are observed which is most likely related to cell death and release of degradative enzymes, since the culture viability drops to 60% on day 12.
