Dissecting N-Glycosylation Dynamics in Chinese Hamster Ovary Cells Fed-batch Cultures using Time Course Omics Analyses.
Summary.
N-linked glycosylation affects the potency, safety, immunogenicity, and pharmacokinetic clearance of several therapeutic proteins including monoclonal antibodies. A robust control strategy is needed to dial in appropriate glycosylation profile during the course of cell culture processes accurately. However, N-glycosylation dynamics remains insufficiently understood owing to the lack of integrative analyses of factors that influence the dynamics, including sugar nucleotide donors, glycosyltransferases, and glycosidases. Here, an integrative approach involving multi-dimensional omics analyses was employed to dissect the temporal dynamics of glycoforms produced during fed-batch cultures of CHO cells. Several pathways including glycolysis, tricarboxylic citric acid cycle, and nucleotide biosynthesis exhibited temporal dynamics over the cell culture period. The steps involving galactose and sialic acid addition were determined as temporal bottlenecks. Our results show that galactose, and not manganese, is able to mitigate the temporal bottleneck, despite both being known effectors of galactosylation. Furthermore, sialylation is limited by the galactosylated precursors and autoregulation of cytidine monophosphate-sialic acid biosynthesis.
Graphical Abstract.
Highlights.
Major glycosylated species exhibit temporal dynamics during fed-batch processes.
Key metabolic pathways linked to N-glycosylation exhibit significant temporal dynamics.
Dynamics in nucleotide sugar donors (NSDs) directly influences glycoform heterogeneity.
Glycoform heterogeneity can be mitigated by supplementing NSD biosynthetic precursors.
Process Biotechnology; Industrial Biotechnology; Metabolomics; Transcriptomics.
Results.
Major Glycosylated Species Show Similar Temporal Dynamics across the Two Fed-Batch Processes Employed but Vary in Their Absolute Values.
A CHO-K1 host-cell-derived clone producing a model mAb was cultivated in two distinct 12-day fed-batch cell culture processes, namely, platform (CC) and HiPDOG (HD), carried out in 1-L working volume bioreactors (see the Transparent Methods for details on the process differences between CC and HD). Higher peak cell densities and titers were observed in the HD process than those observed in the CC process (Figure 2A). Peak lactate levels were significantly lower in the HD (~2 g/L) than in the CC process (~4 g/L). However, cells in CC culture underwent a strong metabolic shift to lactate consumption on day 5 of the process. The higher viable cell density observed in the HD process could therefore be due to the relatively lower peak lactate levels when compared with the CC process. Specific productivity or the amount of protein produced per cell per day (qP) was similar across both processes and increased over time until day 9 (Figure 2A). The dynamics of other process-related parameters and extracellular metabolites is shown in Figure S1A.
Hydrophilic interaction chromatography-based glycan analysis was performed on the mAb molecules present in the spent media samples collected from different days of the two processes across the exponential "growth phase" (days 0, 3, 5) and the stationary "production phase" (days 7, 9, and 12) (Data S1). These glycan structures were then classified into major glycosylated species (Data S2). Each major glycosylated species had similar temporal dynamic patterns in both processes, but differed in the absolute level of the species measured (Figures 2B and S1B). For example, the levels of high mannose species, which is primarily the glycan core with five or more mannose moieties, and the agalactosylated species (G0) increased over time in both processes. However, terminally galactosylated species (term-gal) that have either one (G1) or two (G2) galactoses terminating the glycan chain decreased significantly over time across both processes. Furthermore, a slight decrease in the sialylated and fucosylated species was also observed over time in both processes. To understand the glycan profile of the mAbs at specific time points during the culture, instantaneous glycan profiles were calculated by taking the time derivative of the cumulative glycans with respect to the titer produced (Figure S1C, see Transparent Methods). These results suggested that there are two observations that needed explanation, namely, the absolute differences in the levels of major species (specifically galactosylation/agalactosylation) between the two fed-batch processes and the temporal changes in the major glycan species (which are relatively conserved across the two processes).
To explain the absolute differences in the major species between the two processes, differences in the spent culture media for the two processes were probed. As the two processes were implemented in distinct basal and feed media, a detailed metal ion analysis was performed to understand the differences between the processes (Figure S1D). Manganese, a known cofactor for the enzyme beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase-1 (B4GALT1), which catalyzes the addition of galactose to the extending glycan chain, was observed to be significantly lower in the CC samples. Although other metal ions such as Mg2+, Ca2+, and Cu2+ also showed differences between the two fed-batch processes and they could be potential covariates in contributing to the absolute differences, the goal was to identify the major influencing factor. As Mn2+ is directly linked to the galactosylation step, we hypothesized that manganese level could be the main reason for the differences in the absolute levels of term-gal species between the two processes. To test this, a fed-batch experiment was conducted in shake flasks with pH adjustment, by inoculating cells in the two basal media but with the manganese levels swapped between them (Figure S1E). Cells were inoculated in original or modified versions of CC and HD media. Modified versions of each medium had Mn2+ levels adjusted to match the starting levels in the original formulation of the other medium. This experiment was part of a bigger experiment described later in the last subsection of the Results section. The absolute levels of term-gal produced in the two media were found significantly different and corresponded to the swapped manganese concentrations. This established that the absolute difference in the galactosylated (and agalactosylated) species was mainly due to the difference in the culture manganese levels between the two processes.
From the instantaneous glycan profiles, it was apparent that throughout the fed-batch process, most of the glycans produced have the mannose sugars trimmed and N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) added to them (Figure S1C). However, the amount of agalactosylated species increased with time, whereas those of the galactosylated and sialylated species decreased over time. This suggested that the conversion of high-mannose species into low-mannose species and the subsequent addition of GlcNAc in the Golgi might not have bottlenecks, but the steps involving galactosyl and sialyl transfer might be rate-limiting steps in the glycosylation reaction network. The reaction steps involving glycan chain extension in the N-glycosylation process are highly ordered and sequential. Under pseudo-steady-state assumption, the turnover rate (which includes factors such as precursor, substrate, enzyme concentrations and enzyme activity influenced by enzymatic rate constants, as well as steric hindrance) of reactants to products governs the fraction of substrate converted into product. For successive reaction steps, under no rate limitation, one can plot the substrate and product levels on x and y axes, respectively. For example, if all the glycans attached to mAbs exist as the terminal species, i.e., completely sialylated species, on a scatterplot of nth species as y axis and (n-1)th species as x axis, the data should fall on the y axis, i.e., (n-1)th species ~0% and nth species ~100%. For the rest of the intermediate species, because their levels are near zero, on a scatterplot of ith (y axis) and (i-1)th species (x axis), the data should fall at the intersection of the x and y axes, i.e., (i-1)th species ~0% and ith species ~0%. Alternatively, under rate limitation scenario, the scatterplot would be shifted to non-zero values due to significant buildup of the intermediate species, as seen in case of several glycosylated species (Figure S2). This alternative approach using quasi-steady-state analysis of instantaneous glycan profiles supports the same conclusion that the steps involving galactosyl and sialyl transfer might be rate-limiting steps in the glycosylation reaction network (Figure S2). Temporal variation observed in the glycoforms produced could be an outcome of these bottlenecks in the galactosylation and sialylation steps. To investigate the other potential reasons for the dynamic nature of the glycosylation profile, and to identify the bottlenecks in the galactosylation and sialylation steps, systems analysis approach integrating transcriptomic and metabolomic data was undertaken.
Systems Analysis Suggests that CHO Cells Undergo a Shift in Their Transcriptional, Metabolic, and Glycome Program along the Course of a Fed-Batch Culture.
Time course analyses of global transcript levels (RNA-seq) as well as intra- and extracellular metabolite levels were performed for the samples collected from both CC and HD processes (see the Transparent Methods and Data S3, S4, and S5). Pairwise clustering, using the Spearman correlation was used to cluster samples based on the transcriptional profile of the genes constituting the top 10% variance (Figure 3A [i]). Irrespective of the process employed, the samples within each phase, i.e., growth or production phase, clustered together. Next, pairwise clustering was performed on the time course extracellular and intracellular metabolomic data (Figure 3A [ii, iii]). Similar to the transcriptomic data, the metabolomics data also showed clustering of samples based on growth or production phase, irrespective of the processes. Alternatively, PCA performed on the transcriptome data showed that the trajectory of change in the variance over the course of the culture, as explained by principal component 1 (PC1) and PC2 or PC3, appears to be primarily dictated by the growth or production phase of the culture, together explaining 75% of the total variance (Figure 3B [i]). PCA of the metabolomics data revealed similar shift in the metabolic state of the cells during the growth and production phases, together explaining 63% and 52% of the variance for the extracellular and intracellular metabolites, respectively (Figure 3B [ii, iii]). These analyses showed that the metabolic and transcriptional footprints of samples correlated well within growth or production phase, despite different processes being employed.
Similar clustering analysis of the standardized (Z scored) glycan data for the time course samples suggested that the glycan profiles also appeared to be dependent on the stage of the culture (Figure 3A [iv]). Interestingly, HD1D7 and HD2D7 samples from HD process clustered with growth phase (days 0, 3, 5). Glycan addition to the mAbs is downstream of all the steps, including transcription, translation, and metabolism (nucleotide synthesis). Therefore, a time delay (or lag) is possible, explaining why HD1D7 and HD2D7 glycoforms cluster with growth phase rather than the production phase. In addition, PCA analysis was performed on a list of glycosylation-related genes curated from the literature. Only those genes that were expressed at least for one time point for both the processes were considered in the analysis (Data S6). Similar to the clustering analysis, variance in the glycan-related genes was a function of the state of cells and appeared to be independent of the process (Figure 3B [iv]). Next, correlation analysis was performed on the process parameter data from different days of the two processes, spanning growth and production phases (see Figure 3 legends). Interestingly, unlike the transcriptome and metabolome, the process parameters clustered together based on the process employed (CC or HD) (Figure 3C). Together, the results suggested that although the cells are subjected to relatively different process conditions, the transcriptome, metabolome, and to an extent the N-glycan signature seemed to be dictated primarily by the culture stages (growth or production phase). These results motivated a detailed functional analysis of the time course omics data to gain insights into the complex regulation of N-glycosylation dynamics.
Functional Analysis of the Omics Data Identified Significant Time Dynamics in Key Metabolic Pathways Linked to N-Glycosylation.
An integrative approach, employing three orthogonal methods, was taken to analyze the multi-dimensional omics data. These methods include GSEA, TCGSA, time course metabolite set analysis (TCMSA), and maSigPro. GSEA was employed to identify functional classes that are enriched in either the growth phase or the production phase of the culture. TCGSA or TCMSA were used to capture the functional classes (gene sets or metabolic sets) that may or may not have dynamics in one phase or the other, but might show dynamics over the course of the complete culture. maSigPro was used to identify key genes or metabolites that exhibit significant temporal dynamics (i.e., the genes and metabolites that were significantly perturbed over time) using a regression-based analysis (see Transparent Methods). The analyses were performed on data from both processes separately, and unless otherwise stated, the results/trends from these analyses hold true for both processes.
For GSEA and TCGSA functional class analyses, a composite curated gene set list was used comprising gene sets from KEGG, BioCarta, Reactome, and additional gene sets related to glycosylation from Gene Ontology (Data S7, see also Transparent Methods). Employing GSEA, several pathways were found to be enriched in the growth phase including central energy metabolism, cell cycle, apoptosis, and protein synthesis (Data S8A and S8B, Figure S3). In contrast, several other pathways including those involved in glycosylation, aminoglycan metabolism, glycerolipid metabolism, sphingolipid metabolism, and cell adhesion were enriched in the production phase. TCGSA analysis identifies the gene sets that exhibit time dynamics over the complete duration of the culture irrespective of the changes in the growth or production phases of the culture (see methods section in Transparent Methods for more details). Employing TCGSA and using the same gene set list that was used for GSEA, gene sets such as those related to NSD biosynthetic pathways, pentose phosphate pathway, and oxidative phosphorylation, among others, were identified to have time dynamics over the complete time span of the culture. Interestingly, these gene sets were not enriched in GSEA (Data S9).
Apart from transcription level control of enzyme/metabolic pathway activity, it is well known that changes in metabolic pathway flux can also be influenced significantly by intermediate metabolite levels. To investigate temporal changes in metabolite levels across the fed-batch processes, TCMSA was performed on the intracellular metabolomic dataset. A curated list of metabolites based on their functional classes was employed for the analysis (Data S10). The analysis suggested that several pathways that exhibit significant temporal dynamics at the transcriptional level also vary significantly at the metabolite level. These include sphingolipid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, purine and pyrimidine metabolism, nucleotide sugar metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and glycolytic pathway (Data S11). In addition, a statistical test (maSigPro) was employed to identify key transcripts and metabolites that show significant time dynamics. Top transcripts and intracellular metabolites that vary significantly over time were ranked based on their q-values for the maSigPro test, and a ranked list is shown for overall data as well as for various functional groups (Data S12) and metabolic pathways (Data S13).
Combining the results from all the functional set and statistical analyses, a list of key pathways that exhibit significant time dynamics in CHO cells during fed-batch culture time course was curated (Table 1). For each functional class listed in the table, gene/metabolites that had significant time dynamics are also included. Several pathways from this list were identified as potential regulators of N-glycosylation dynamics because of their direct or indirect linkage with the N-glycosylation process (Figure 4). Next, temporal changes in these specific pathways were explored.
Temporal Dynamics in Levels of Enzyme Transcripts and Intermediate Metabolites of Metabolic Pathways Influencing N-Glycosylation Dynamics.
Glycolysis.
The glycolytic pathway was found to be enriched in the growth phase (GSEA). TCGSA suggested that glycolytic gene sets exhibit significant temporal perturbation or dynamics (Table 1). Glycolytic metabolites such as glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) and fructose-6-phosphate (F6P) serve as precursors to the NSD biosynthetic pathways. Therefore, changes in the transcript levels of glycolytic enzymes and in the corresponding metabolites can potentially influence the flux directed toward NSD biosynthesis. Glucose consumption rates (qGlc) and lactate production rates (qLac) have been used as indicators of the dynamics in central energy metabolism. For both processes, the metabolic state of the cells in the bioreactors shifted from lactate-producing (qLac/qGlc>0) to lactate-consuming state (qLac/qGlc<0) and again to a marginally lactate-producing state toward the end of the culture (Figure S4A). Such metabolic shifts are known to be outcomes of changes in the glycolytic gene expression and intermediate metabolite levels. Several glycolytic enzymes, including ADP-dependent glucokinase (ADPGK), 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFKFB4), triosephosphate isomerase (TPI), hexokinase-2 (HK2), and fructose bisphosphate aldolase C (ALDOC), changed significantly over time (Data S12). Similarly, metabolites such as lactate, dihydroxyacetone phosphate, hexose diphosphates, and pyruvate were also found varying significantly with time (Data S13, Figures 4 and S4B).
Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism.
Purine and pyrimidine metabolism provides essential nucleotides during NSD biosynthesis such as cytidine triphosphate, guanosine triphosphate, and uridine triphosphate. Both these pathways are enriched in the growth phase (GSEA, Data S8B) and also show significant time dynamics in the time course analyses (Data S9 and S11). Several key enzymes involved in these pathways also vary significantly with time, such as ribose phosphate pyrophosphokinase 1 (PRPS1), thymidylsynthatase (TYMS), uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG), ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase M2 (RRM2), and inosine-5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 (IMPDH2). Several key metabolites also exhibit significant temporal dynamics, including thymidine, 2'-O-methylcytidine, and N1-methylinosine (Table 1).
TCA Cycle.
The tricarboxylic citric acid (TCA) cycle is directly linked to glycolysis, glutamine, and purine and pyrimidine metabolic pathways (Figure S4B). Several gene sets related to the TCA cycle were enriched in the growth phase (GSEA, Data S8B). These gene sets also exhibited significant time dynamics (TCGSA, Data S9). The levels of several genes including those encoding for fumarate hydratase (FH), ATP citrate synthase (ACLY), NADP-dependent malic enzyme (ME1), and succinate dehydrogenase (SDHC) varied over time (maSigPro, Data S12). Interestingly, although the TCA cycle did not show up in TCMSA analysis, a few of its metabolites including aconitate, citrate, and malate were either up- or downregulated over time (Data S13).
Other Central Energy Metabolism Pathways.
Other pathways linked to glycolysis and TCA cycle such as glutamine/glutamate metabolism (which serves as a precursor to N-acetylated NSD intermediates), pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), and oxidative phosphorylation showed significant time dynamics in their corresponding gene sets, transcripts, and metabolites (Table 1). For example, transketolase (TKT) and ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (RPIA) enzymes in the PPP decreased with time, whereas NADH dehydrogenase 1 alpha subcomplex 7 (NDUFA7) from oxidative phosphorylation increased with time (Figure 4, Data S12).
Glycosyltransferases.
The concentration of glycosyltransferases can directly affect the reaction rates for each of the glycosylation steps. GSEA analysis suggested that gene sets containing glycosyltransferases were primarily enriched in the production phase (Data S8B). These gene sets also showed up significant in TCGSA analysis (Data S9). Several genes encoding for mannosidases and glycosyltransferases varied over time (Data S12, Figure 4). For example, 1,2-alpha mannosidases (MAN1B1, MAN2A2, MAN2B1, MAN2B2, and MAN1A1), N-acetylglucosamineyltransferases (MGAT4B and MGAT1), and beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase 1 (B4GALT1) increased over time (Figure S5). Other mannosidases (MAN1C1, MAN2A1, MAN2C1), fucosyltransferase (FUT8), and sialyltrasferases (ST3GALT3 and ST3GAL4) showed marginal or no dynamics.
Glycosidases.
Glycosidases catalyze cleavage of specific sugar moieties from the glycan structures on therapeutic proteins (and other host cell proteins). TCGSA strongly suggested that gene sets linked to glycan degradation vary significantly over time (Data S9), and GSEA analysis suggested that these gene sets are enriched in the production phase (Data S8B). Most of the glycosidase enzymes showed up in the maSigPro analysis including, fucosidase (FUCA1), galactosidases (GLA, GLB1), sialidases (NEU1, NEU2, NEU3, NEU4), and hexosidases (HEXA, HEXB) (Figure 4).
Other Regulators of Glycosylation.
Apart from enzymes or gene sets that are directly linked to glycosylation, a gene set comprising regulators of glycosylation also showed up significant in GSEA and TCGSA analyses. The expression levels of most of the genes in this gene set increased over time (Figure 4, Data S12). These include transmembrane protein 59 (TMEM59), interleukin-15 (IL15) and golgin subfamily A member 2 (GOLGA2). For example, TMEM59 has been reported to be an inhibitor of galactosylation and sialylation. Temporal dynamics in transcript levels of TMEM59 levels can affect the glycoforms produced.
In summary, functional analyses of time course omics data identified a number of enriched pathways and functional classes that can influence either the levels of substrates for NSD biosynthesis or the enzymes linked with the N-glycosylation process. These include genes and metabolites involved in glycolysis, TCA cycle, purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, and amino sugar and NSD biosynthesis. Key genes and metabolites involved in these pathways that could be potential limiting factors for N-glycosylation are listed in Table 1 and Data S15. In the next section, a detailed analysis of the NSD biosynthetic pathway dynamics is performed.
Analysis of Temporal Dynamics in Nucleotide Sugar Donor Biosynthetic Pathway Suggests Galactosylation and Sialylation Enzymatic Steps Might Be Substrate Limited.
NSDs serve as substrates for the N-glycosylation process. Intracellular levels of NSDs were quantified from the cell pellet samples taken at multiple time points from the bioreactors for both fed-batch processes. The NSD concentrations varied over the course of fed-batch culture, and the dynamics for each NSD is conserved between the two fed-batch processes employed (Figure 5A). The dynamics in NSDs could be a result of temporal changes in the precursors from glycolysis and/or the enzymes and intermediate metabolites involved in the NSD biosynthetic pathways (Figure 5B). Time course transcriptome and metabolome data were used to probe biosynthetic pathway changes for each NSD, to identify the cause for temporal variation observed in the corresponding NSDs.
GDP-Mannose.
Glucose is converted to G6P by hexokinase (HK1 and HK2). G6P enters the NSD biosynthetic pathway and serves as a precursor to all the NSDs (Figure 5B). G6P exhibited significant time dynamics over the culture period (Data S13, Figure 5B). It is converted to F6P, which serves as the precursor for guanosine triphospho-mannose (GDP-Man) synthesis (Figure 5B). The intracellular concentration of GDP-Man increased during the course of the culture.
GDP-Fucose.
Levels of guanosine triphospho-L-fucose (GDP-Fuc), which serves as the substrate for fucose addition to the glycan chain, for most part were relatively constant over the course of the culture for both the processes. GDP-Fuc is synthesized from GDP-Man in a two-step enzymatic process catalyzed by GDP-mannose 4,6 dehydratase (GMDS) and GDP-L-fucose synthase (encoded by the gene tissue-specific transplantation antigen P35B [TSTA3]) (Figure 5B). Marginal dynamics were observed in the transcript levels of the two enzymes, with GMDS going up with time and TSTA3 decreasing over time.
UDP-GlcNAc.
Uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) serves as the substrate for GlcNAc addition to the glycan chain. It is synthesized from G6P via intermediates including glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcNAc6P) and glucosamine-1-phosphate (GlcNAc1P) (Figure 5B). UDP-GlcNAc increases significantly with time (~15-fold in CC; ~12-fold in HD), whereas no significant dynamics is observed for GlcNAc6P and GlcNAc1P (Data S13). The expression levels of the genes that encode the corresponding enzymes involved in the synthesis of GlcNAc1P also did not exhibit any significant time dynamics (Data S12). UDP-GlcNAc is also converted to Uridine diphospho-N-acetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAc) by UDP-glucose 4-epimerase, which is encoded by the gene GALE. UDP-GalNAc shows similar trends as UDP-GlcNAc despite significant increase in the expression level of GALE (Figure 5, Data S12).
UDP-Galactose.
Uridine diphospho-galactose (UDP-Gal) serves as the substrate for galactose addition to the glycan chain. It is generally synthesized from G6P via a multi-step process (Figure 5B). G6P is initially converted to UDP-glucose (UDP-Glc), which is then converted to UDP-Gal by GALE. Transcript levels of enzymes involved in the UDP-Glc biosynthesis did not change significantly with time (Data S12), whereas the transcript levels of GALE were observed to increase with time. However, both UDP-Gal and UDP-Glc levels decreased significantly during the production phase (Figure 5A). As G6P levels decreased over time, the drop in UPD-Gal could be a direct result of decrease in G6P levels.
CMP-Sialic Acid.
Cytidine monophospho-sialic acid (CMP-Sia) serves as the substrate for sialic acid addition to the glycan chain. Formation of CMP-Sia from UDP-GlcNAc is a multi-step process (Figure 5B). UDP-GlcNAc is converted to N-acetyl mannosamine (ManNAc) by the enzyme glucosamine (UDP-N-acetyl)-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE). ManNAc is converted to 5-acetyl neuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) by a series of enzymatic steps, which is then converted to CMP-Sia. CMP-Sia is known to strongly inhibit (with Hill coefficient = 4.1) the epimerase function of GNE, thus maintaining an autoregulation of CMP-Sia levels. The levels of CMP-Sia were in the lower concentration range, although a slight increase was observed over the course of the fed-batch processes (Figure 5A). Inhibition of the epimerase function of GNE by slightly higher concentrations of CMP-Sia might result in inhibition of UDP-GlcNAc conversion to downstream intermediates including Neu5Ac. This is observed to be the case as the Neu5Ac levels decreased over time, even though the levels of UDP-GlcNAc increased over time (Figure 5B).
Galactosylation and sialylation were observed to decrease over time (Figure 2B). Decrease in galactosylated species can now be explained by the decrease in the UDP-Gal levels over the course of the fed-batch culture. The decrease in sialylation can be explained by the decrease in galactosylated species over time. Relatively low availability of CMP-Sia does not help the drop in sialylation incurred due to the decrease in galactosylated species. With the help of the above-described understanding for the cause of the drop in the UDP-Gal levels and low levels of CMP-Sia, we next designed and performed experiments to overcome these bottlenecks in an attempt to increase and maintain a sustained level of galactosylation and sialylation in fed-batch cultures.
Temporal Rate Limitations in Galactosylation and Sialylation Can Be Mitigated by Supplementation of Corresponding NSD Biosynthetic Pathway Intermediates.
To explore if the drop in the substrate (UDP-Gal) and/or cofactor (Mn2+) levels of the enzyme that catalyzes galactosylation (B4galt1) is the root cause for the drop in the galactosylation of mAb glycoform produced, a pH-controlled fed-batch experiment was conducted in shake flasks with additional supplementation of galactose and/or Mn2+. Galactose can be converted intracellularly to UDP-Gal by the action of enzymes encoded by GALK and GALT, the expression of which was observed to be relatively constant over the course of the fed-batch culture (Figure S6A). The shake flask experiment was performed using media used in the CC and HD bioreactor runs, with varying levels of Mn2+ (0.9 nM, 200 nM and 2,000 nM) or with combined supplementation of 5 g/L galactose and 2,000 nM Mn2+. The additives were added to the culture on day 0. Manganese supplementation resulted in a decrease in cell growth in CC medium, whereas no such effect was observed in HD medium (Figure S6B). Time course glycan analysis suggested that although Mn2+ enhanced galactosylation, Mn2+ alone was insufficient to achieve high and sustained levels of galactosylation across the course of the culture (Figures 6A and S6). Interestingly, additional supplementation of galactose resulted in high and sustained levels of galactosylated species, which could be explained by the significantly higher UDP-Gal levels (Figure 6A). This established that maintaining higher levels of UDP-Gal and Mn2+ can help mitigate the drop in the galactosylation level over the course of a fed-batch culture.
Next, the effect of enhancing the substrate level for sialyltransferases, namely, CMP-Sia, on total sialylation was probed. As inferred in the previous section, it was hypothesized that low levels of CMP-Sia in fed-batch cultures could be due to the presence of active inhibitory feedback regulation of epimerase activity of GNE by CMP-Sia, limiting its own formation (autoregulation). The epimerase encoded by GNE converts UDP-GlcNAc to ManNAc. Supplementation of downstream metabolite of GNE, namely, ManNAc, can bypass this autoregulation by CMP-Sia resulting in higher levels of CMP-Sia, which has been previously demonstrated. However, supplementation of an upstream metabolite, namely, GlcNAc, should not result in increase in CMP-Sia. To test this, a fed-batch experiment with either no supplementation (control) or with supplementation of 20 mM ManNAc or GlcNAc was performed in pH-controlled shake flasks. For this experiment, HD medium supplemented with 2,000 nM Mn2+ and 5 g/L of galactose was used to ensure maximum possible levels of galactosylation. Day 3 and day 9 intracellular NSD and mAb glycan levels were measured for all conditions (Figures 6B and S7A). A 2-fold increase in sialylation was observed in case of ManNAc-supplemented media, but no such increase in sialylation was observed for GlcNAc-supplemented or control conditions (Figures 6B and S7B). In fact, a small drop in the sialylation was observed in the GlcNAc-supplemented condition when compared with the control condition, which could be attributed to a proportional drop in galactosylation observed (when compared with control) (Figures 6B and S7). The increase in the mAb sialylation in case of ManNAc supplementation could be explained by an ~24-fold increase in intracellular CMP-Sia levels compared to the control condition (Figure 6B). No significant change in CMP-Sia levels was observed in the GlcNAc-supplemented condition when compared to the control condition.
