Impact of cell culture media additives on IgG glycosylation produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells Impact of cell culture media additives on IgG glycosylation produced in CHO cells.
Abstract.
Glycosylation is a key critical quality attribute for monoclonal antibodies and other recombinant proteins because of its impact on effector mechanisms and half-life. In this study, a variety of compounds were evaluated for their ability to modulate glycosylation profiles of recombinant monoclonal antibodies produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Compounds were supplemented into the cell culture feed of fed-batch experiments performed with a CHO K1 and a CHO DG44 cell line expressing a recombinant immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1). Experiments were performed in spin tubes or the ambr 15 controlled bioreactor system, and the impact of the compounds at various concentrations was determined by monitoring the glycosylation profile of the IgG and cell culture parameters, such as viable cell density, viability, and titer. Results indicate that the highest impact on mannosylation was achieved through 15 microM kifunensine supplementation leading to an 85.8% increase in high-mannose containing species. Fucosylation was reduced by 76.1% through addition of 800 microM 2-F-peracetyl fucose. An increase of 40.9% in galactosylated species was achieved through the addition of 120 mM galactose in combination with 48 microM manganese and 24 microM uridine. Furthermore, 6.9% increased sialylation was detected through the addition of 30 microM dexamethasone in combination with the same manganese, uridine, and galactose mixture used to increase total galactosylation. Further compounds or combinations of additives were also efficient at achieving a smaller overall glycosylation modulation, required, for instance, during the development of biosimilars. To the best of our knowledge, no evaluation of the efficacy of such a variety of compounds in the same cell culture system has been described. The studied cell culture media additives are efficient modulators of glycosylation and are thus a valuable tool to produce recombinant glycoproteins.
RESULTS.
Glycosylation profiles in controlled versus uncontrolled systems for two mAbs.
The glycosylation profiles of IgG1s produced in a CHO K1 (mAb1) (Figure 2a) or a CHO DG44 (mAb2) cell line (Figure 2b) cultured in either ST (uncontrolled system) or in the ambr 15 bioreactor system (controlled system) were compared to understand the impact of the cultivation process on this cQA. It should be noted that mAb1 only contained Fc glycosylation, whereas mAb2 showed additional Fab glycosylation. For mAb1, the average total IgG galactosylation was increased for the controlled ambr 15 system versus uncontrolled ST system (+8.9%, +10.7%, and +11.9% for Days 7, 10, and 12, respectively), confirming the impact of DO and pH regulation on the glycosylation of this IgG. Total GlcNAc (and mannose) was lower in the controlled system, whereas total fucosylation was not impacted by the cultivation conditions.
In contrast, the cultivation mode had no impact on either the galactosylation or sialylation of mAb2, indicating that the glycosylation of IgGs may be more robust to changes in process conditions only in specific cell lines/clones. A time-dependent decrease of total sialylation correlating with an increase in galactosylation was observed for mAb2 in both controlled and uncontrolled systems, suggesting either a higher activity of sialidases or an increase in the synthesis of galactosylated glycans during the stationary phase. No statistically significant differences were observed for IVC, viability, titer, or lactate and ammonia production in these experiments (data not shown).
Altogether, these data indicate that glycosylation profiles may or may not be impacted by the cultivation process, depending on the cell line used. In case of mAb1, the galactosylation profile was increased in controlled conditions and may thus limit the efficacy of compounds aiming at increasing these glycoforms.
Mannosylation.
Compounds intended to increase high-mannose species were evaluated for their impact on glycan species, IVC and titer of mAb1 in the CHO K1 cell line (Figure 3). Addition of 1.3 mM of the glucosidase inhibitor castanospermine in both small-scale systems produced one large unknown peak in the CGE-LIF analysis (50.5% for ST and 52.8% for the ambr 15). Glycosylation analysis of the same samples using UPLC-MS led to the assignment of the unknown peak as Man9Glc1/Man8Glc2 (data not shown). In contrast, a similar amount of the glucosidase inhibitor deoxynojirimycin (1.3 mM) had no effect on mAb1 glycosylation (data not shown).
Glycosylation results of the additional compounds to modulate mannosylation are summarized as absolute difference compared with the control condition in Figure 3. The repartition of individual mannosylated species is shown in Supporting Information Table 3, and the impact of the compounds on the other glycosylation groups (total GlcNAc, galactosylation, sialylation, and fucosylation) can be found in Supporting Information Figure 1. Compounds are ordered from lowest to highest according to their capacity to increase mannosylation. Kifunensine, which was applied in ST at a concentration of 15 muM in the feed, showed the greatest ability to increase total mannosylated species (+85.8%), with the largest increase being Man9 (+58.4%). Supplementation with 833 mM tagatose increased total mannosylation by 30.3% in ST with a predominant increase in Man5 (24.0%). 750 microM deoxymannojirimycin caused an absolute increase in total mannosylated species of 28.3% with an overall increase in Man5, Man6, Man7, and Man8. Supplementation with mannose (200 g/L) increased all Man species, with the highest increase being Man5 (+13.0%), most probably because of the inhibition of mannosidase activity in the ER and the Golgi, as suggested by Slade et al. (2016). 150 nM monensin, high osmolality, 833 mM sucrose, and raffinose conditions all increased Man5 (+4.6%, +4.1% +4.1%, and +1.7%, respectively) but no other high-mannose forms. Mannostatin A (0.1 mM in feed) showed no effect on glycosylation.
Generally, if an increase in Man5 is desired, supplementation of tagatose, raffinose, monensin, mannose, or sucrose seems advisable or a high osmolality may be used. Regarding a preferred increase in all high-mannose species (especially Man9), kifunensine may be applied. For an increase of Man5-Man8, supplementation with deoxymannojirimycin would be preferable.
If we consider cellular data and volumetric titer, the IVC was equal or slightly greater than 100% compared with the control for 75 nM monensin, 250 microM deoxymannojirimycin, and mannose feed instead of glucose. Less than 10% reduction in IVC was detected for 400 mM sucrose, 150 nM monensin, 66 g/L mannose, and 750 microM deoxymannojirimycin, whereas >25% decrease in IVC was found for 3,000 mOsmol/kg and 833 mM tagatose. Titer was either not affected or mildly enhanced by 400 mM sucrose, mannostatin A, 150 mM raffinose, 833 mM sucrose, monensine (150 nM and 75 nM), 250 microM deoxymannojirimycin, 400 mM tagatose, 750 microM deoxymannojirimycin, kifunensine (5, 10, and 15 microM), and 66 g/L mannose. Less than 25% reduction in titer was observed for 833 mM tagatose, 200 g/L mannose, and the mannose feed instead of the glucose feed. More than 25% decrease in titer was detected for 3,000 mOsmol/kg. A slight negative influence on IVC, viability, and titer was observed for the supplementation with castanospermine (data not shown).
To understand possible interactions between factors impacting the final glycosylation profile, the mass fraction of mAb glycoform produced relative to the total amount of antibody secreted was calculated for the growth phase (D0-D7) and the stationary phase (D7-D12) and is presented in Supporting Information Table 4. These data indicate that the increase in mannosylation in the conditions with additives is higher in the stationary phase compared with the growth phase. This is most likely because of the accumulation of the additives in the final medium after successive feed addition. For some compounds like raffinose and sucrose, the increase in mannosylated glycans was only detectable for the fraction of the mAb produced after D7, which may indicate that higher concentrations might be beneficial. If the fi data obtained for all the additives of these groups are correlated to each other and to additional parameters like Qp, correlations between glycoforms and cell culture parameters can be drawn. For this data set, results indicate that overall, mannosylation correlates negatively with both fucosylation and total GlcNAc forms independently of the culture phase (R2 of -0.99 and -0.97, respectively). In contrast, a weaker correlation of -0.73 was found between mannosylation and galactosylation indicating that other, independent variables impact galactosylation. Finally, no significant correlation was found between any of the glycoforms and Qp, indicating that the effect of the additives on mannosylation and related glycoforms is independent of Qp.
Fucosylation.
Fucosylation can be decreased by the addition of compounds that specifically reduce fucosylation or by the increase in high-mannose species, which are generally afucosylated. In the following, only results for compounds intended to influence fucosylation without a concurrent increase in mannosylated species are summarized (Figure 4). The fucose derivative 2F-PerAcFuc is a well-known fucosyltransferase inhibitor and was more efficient in reducing fucosylation than Reactive Red 120 or MPA. 2F-PerAcFuc was found to decrease fucosylation in a dose-dependent manner, with the largest decrease being 76.1% at the highest dose tested (800 microM). The mass fraction of fucosylated mAb produced during the exponential and stationary phases (Supporting Information Table 5) indicates that almost 90% of the antibody produced between D7 and D12 is afucosylated, indicating that the accumulation of the additive through multiple feeding time points is beneficial to the final afucosylation level. DMSO (solvent used for solubilization of 2F-PerAcFuc) did not show any effect on antibody fucosylation but resulted in a decreased IVC and increased Qp. Supplementation with the fucosyltransferase inhibitor Reactive Red 120 was not successful in reducing fucosylation even at high concentrations (500 microM), which instead resulted in early cell death on Day 13 (data not shown). MPA was only successful in decreasing fucosylation (3.4%) when added at high concentrations from the beginning of the fed-batch (25 microM). Higher concentrations of 100 and 250 microM had a detrimental effect on viability and cell growth (data not shown). To lower the negative impact on IVC, viability, and titer, a single dose was added at the end of the growth phase on Day 7 but resulted in a similar glycosylation profile as the control. Overall, the additives applied to reduce fucosylation did only show a small impact (<5%) on other glycan species (Supporting Information Figure 2). In summary, to reduce fucosylation and thus increase ADCC, supplementation of the fucose-analog 2F-PerAcFuc seems to be the most efficient method.
Galactosylation.
Different additives and mixtures of additives were applied to modulate antibody galactosylation. Their impact on the glycan species, IVC, and titer of the mAb1 in the CHO K1 cell line was analyzed (Figure 5). In the control condition, 11.5% +- 2.1% of the IgG were galactosylated on Day 12, with a split between monogalactosylated and digalactosylated species of 10.8% +- 2.2% and 0.7% +- 0.6%, respectively. Combinations of cytidine (Cyt), fucose (Fuc), and uridine, as well as sole addition of manganese chloride (Mn) or a mixture of Mn and galactose (Gal) with or without uridine, increased galactosylation (Figure 5a) without affecting negatively IVC or titer. This indicates that the Mn level already present in the medium was not sufficient to trigger the "on/off response" described as necessary to enable maximum galactosylation (Grainger & James, 2013). Further impact on the glycan profile is shown in Supporting Information Figure 3. The highest increase in galactosylation was obtained with a combination of galactose (120 mM), manganese chloride (48 microM), and uridine (24 mM) (UMG) added in the feed. This condition showed an increased IVC (Figure 5b) and titer (Figure 5c) for mAb1. This clone-dependent effect mediated by uridine might be linked to a low abundance of nucleotide precursors uridine triphosphate and uridine diphosphate (UDP), which are essential to regulate cellular functions, such as proliferation rate and cell cycle. The total cumulative concentration of uridine added to the medium in this study was 6.5 mM and was thus lower than the concentration of 10 mM, shown to act as a potent inhibitor of IVC and mAb production (Grainger & James, 2013). A maximum galactosylation of approximately 50% was observed for the tested conditions, which suggests a saturation of the galactosylation level. The only negative effector of galactosylation was 100 mM ammonium chloride, which decreased total galactosylation by 8.6% (Day 12) when compared with the control, also negatively impacting IVC and titer. Higher concentrations of ammonium chloride (200 mM), which is a toxic cellular waste product, resulted in cell death until Day 10 concurrent with detrimental reduction in titer (data not shown).
In summary, our data demonstrate that galactosylation can be modulated linearly by an appropriate choice of additive or combination of additives, while avoiding to negatively impact growth or viability. However, because of the dynamic nature of a culture in fed-batch, a maximum galactosylation level might be reached over time.
Sialylation.
Experiments for modulation of antibody sialylation were performed with a CHO DG44 cell line producing mAb2 with higher sialylation levels. For modulation of sialylation, a feed with UMG was used as control feed. This control condition was chosen because galactosylation is critical for binding of sialic acid and increased galactosylation is, therefore, a requirement for high sialylation levels. For mAb2, supplementation of 120 mM galactose, 48 microM manganese chloride, and 24 mM uridine did not only increase overall galactosylation (+17.6% at Day 12 in ST) but also caused an increase in total sialylation by 19.0% (data not shown). To differentiate between the glycosylation structures of the Fab and Fc fragment, the antibody was digested with FabRICATOR , and the generated fragments were separated before glycosylation analysis using high-performance liquid chromatography. As expected from literature (Nigrovic, 2013), our results show that Fc sialylation was almost absent (<0.5%) whereas the Fab part was highly sialylated with 34.5% total sialylation (Figure 6a). Likewise, after the addition of compounds to increase sialylation (750 microM DANA, 50 mM ManNAc, 5 mg/ml fetuin, 0.5 mM CuCl2 on Day 8, and 30 microM dexamethasone), sialylated species were mainly found on the Fab fragment, and a maximum of approximately 2% Fc sialylation was observed (data not shown). Through supplementation with different additives in the cell culture feed, the total relative amount of sialylated species of intact mAb2 was modulated between -3.6% and 6.9% as compared with the control (Figure 6b). When comparing the amount of mono- and disialylated species, a strong decrease in monosialylated species concurrent with a high increase in disialylated species was observed for dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, 200 mM ManNAc, and the combination of ManNAc and DANA, as well as for CuCl2. To provide an overview of the quantitative effect of supplementation on sialylation, the increase in absolute sialic acid amount per mole antibody was calculated in Figure 6c. Furthermore, the impact of those supplements on other glycan structures are visualized Supporting Information Figure 4. The IVC and the AUC of the titer of the fed-batch experiments are shown in Figure 6d,e. It should be highlighted that for the glucocorticoids hydrocortisone and dexamethasone, IVC was similar or lower compared with the control whereas titer was increased for all concentrations.
As for mannosylation and fucosylation, the mass fraction of sialylated glycan compared to the amount of mAb secreted during exponential and stationary phase was calculated (Supporting Information Table 6). For supplementation with DANA alone or the combination DANA/ManNAc, the mass fraction of sialylated glycan was higher during the exponential phase than during the stationary phase. Because DANA is a known sialidase inhibitor, our results suggest that the lower sialylation level observed after D10 is unlikely to be the result of the sialidase activity. For other combinations like CuCl2 and dexamethasone, the increase in the fraction of sialylated mAb was higher in the stationary phase than in the exponential phase. Whereas the increase in sialylation because of dexamethasone treatment can clearly be correlated with a decrease in Qp (R2 = -0.84), the increase seen for CuCl2 was clearly not linked to Qp, suggesting different mechanisms underlying the observed increase in sialylation.
In summary, the additive dexamethasone was the most successful compound for increasing the total amount of sialylated glycans (30 microM dexamethasone) as well as disialylated species (10 microM dexamethasone) concurrent with a positive effect on titer. The application of CuCl2 to modulate sialylation needs to be considered more carefully because of its possible negative impact on cell growth, and application at the beginning of the stationary phase is recommended. Furthermore, the combination of ManNAc and DANA showed a synergistic effect on sialylation increase without affecting VCD or titer, thus highlighting the pertinence of combinations of additives.
