Impact of Acetylated and Non-Acetylated Fucose Analogues on IgG Glycosylation.
The biological activity of therapeutic antibodies is highly influenced by their glycosylation profile. A valuable method for increasing the cytotoxic efficacy of antibodies, which are used, for example, in cancer treatment, is the reduction of core fucosylation, as this enhances the elimination of target cells through antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Development of fucose analogues is currently the most promising strategy to reduce core fucosylation without cell line engineering. Since peracetylated sugars display enhanced cell permeability over the highly polar free hydroxy sugars, this work sought to compare the efficacy of peracetylated sugars to their unprotected forms. Two potent fucose analogues, 2-deoxy-2-fluorofucose and 5-alkynylfucose, and their acetylated forms were compared for their effects on fucosylation. 5-alkynylfucose proved to be more potent than 2-deoxy-2-fluorofucose at reducing core fucosylation but was associated with a significant higher incorporation of the alkynylated fucose analogue. Acetylation of the sugar yielded only slightly lower fucosylation levels suggesting that acetylation has a minor impact on cellular entry. Even though the efficacy of all tested components was confirmed, results presented in this study also show a significant incorporation of unnatural fucose analogues into the glycosylation pattern of the produced IgG, with unknown effect on safety and potency of the monoclonal antibody.
3. Results.
The reduction of core fucosylation in the Fc-part of antibodies leads to enhanced ADCC and is therefore the aim of several investigations in the literature. Supplementation of small molecules as additive to cell culture media is one possibility to achieve a reduction in fucosylation without further cell line engineering.
3.1. Cell Performance.
Fed-batch cell culture experiments on a CHO clone producing an IgG1 were performed to assess the efficacy of the 2F- and 5-Alk fucose analogues on reducing fucosylation of the recombinant IgG1. For manufacture of therapeutic mAbs, it is critical to ensure that the inhibitors do not negatively impact cellular performance, such as lowering the viable cell density (VCD), the viability of the cultured cells or the volumetric titer (amount of IgG produced). Several metabolites and other parameters like LDH were monitored in the supernatant of the cell culture to study the physiological state of the cells. A control condition containing DMSO only was incorporated into the study to distinguish between the effect of DMSO and the impact of the fucose analogues, as the fucose analogues were dissolved in DMSO for addition to cell culture.
As visualized in Figure 2, supplementation of a feed containing 2.33% DMSO led to a reduction of the VCD (calculated as area under the curve) of about 11% compared to the control condition (n = 8). Independently of the applied concentration of 2F-Fuc and 5-AlkFuc, all conditions had a similar VCD compared to the DMSO-treated condition. The reduction was in a range between 5% and 15% and was suggested to be within the biological variability of fed-batch bioprocesses. Quantification of the IgG production showed a similar positive effect in all conditions containing 2.33% DMSO. The titer was about 6% to 10% higher and resulted in an increased specific productivity of about 25 +- 1% in all conditions containing DMSO. As VCD, IgG and the resulting specific productivity of fucose analogues were in a similar range than the DMSO control, they were thought to have no impact on cell parameters chosen in this study.
3.2. Glycosylation Profile.
The glycosylation profile has an impact on efficacy and safety of therapeutic antibodies and is one of the main critical quality attributes. The impact of fucose analogues on the glycosylation profile of two biological replicates was investigated on day 7, 10 and 12.
The Fc-glycosylation profile of the IgG produced in untreated CHO cells (control) on day 12 consisted of 80.1% terminal N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), 16.8% galactosylated structures and 3.0% high mannose glycans. 95.6% of the glycans were core fucosylated whereas terminal sialylation was mostly under the detection limit and is therefore considered as negligible (Figure 3). The main fucosylated forms were biantennary species with no galactose (G0F) with 77.0% as visualized in Table 1. The second most prevalent glycan structure was G1F with 15.5% relative abundance. Galactosylation of the second branch led to the di-galactosylated glycan G2F, which was detected in 0.9% of the glycans. Other fucosylated structures like G0F-N (1.8%) and G1F-N (0.4%) were less frequent. The smaller amount of afucosylated structures in the control condition were composed of Man5 (3.0%), G0 (0.8%) and G0-N (0.5%), while the galactosylated glycan structures G1 and G2 were below the detection limit.
To assess the impact of fucose analogues on the glycosylation profile, the impact of the solvent used to dissolve the compounds needed to be excluded first. The applied DMSO concentration was 2.33% and showed no detectable changes of the glycosylation pattern compared to the control (Table 1). Total fucosylation was examined on days 7, 10 and 12, and all inhibitors tested were able to decrease IgG core fucosylation significantly. In general, a higher reduction of the fucosylation was achieved with both 5-Alk fucose analogues compared to the 2F-Fuc analogues. The most important decrease in core fucosylation was observed for the 800 microM peracetylated 5-AlkFuc condition with a final IgG core fucosylation of 8.6% (Figure 3, day 12). Comparison of acetylated versus the free-hydroxy fucose analogues showed that acetylation led to a larger decrease in core fucosylation, for both inhibitor types, at all concentrations tested (Figure 3). Interestingly, the effect of the acetylation was generally less important for increasing concentrations of the inhibitors. For example, acetylation for the 5-AlkFuc inhibitor (on day 12) led to 11.2%, 3.8% and 1.6% lower total fucosylated species at 200, 400 and 800 microM respectively, showing that acetylation is not necessary for higher amounts of derivatives. The only exception to this pattern was for the 2F-Fuc analogues measured on day 7, in which the opposite trend was observed. As the concentration of 2F-Fuc increased, acetylation lead to more pronounced reduction in core fucosylation (3.4% at 200 microM, 5.8% at 400 microM and 6.6% at 800 microM).
Altogether, these results indicate that all fucose analogues can reduce total fucosylation, peracetylation improves the impact of the fucose analogues and increasing inhibitor concentrations reduces the impact of peracetylation.
3.3. Incorporation of Fucose Analogues.
Mass spectrometry data revealed that both fucose analogues are also incorporated into the antibody (this is henceforth indicated with an * after the respective glycan structure abbreviation). For simplicity, all fucosylation values provided so far have also included any incorporated fucose analogues. The fluorinated fucose was detected in the released glycans by a mass shift of +1.99 Da, while the alkylated fucose was recognized by a +9.99 Da shift. The detected mass shift of the fucose analogues is visualized in the supplementary data in Figure S1 and Figure S2 exemplarily for the G0F species. 5-AlkFuc led to higher incorporation of the fucose analogue compared to 2F-Fuc. 5% of the glycans showed 5-AlkFuc incorporation and 0.8% of the glycans showed 2F-Fuc incorporation, independently of the applied concentration. Due to higher total fucosylation for lower derivative concentrations, the relative values for incorporation varied, while absolute values were consistent. To visualize the concentration dependency, the relative incorporation of fucose analogues to the respective total fucosylation was calculated (Figure 4). For example, only 10% of the glycans remained core-fucosylated in the 800 microM 5-AlkFuc condition on day 12 (Figure 3), and 50% of these forms were chemically modified (Figure 4). The lower 5-AlkFuc concentrations 400 microM and 200 microM led to 37% and 20% relative incorporation, respectively. These results indicate a linear correlation between incorporation and the applied inhibitor concentration. Thus, higher 5-AlkFuc concentrations may lead to more undesired incorporation.
No incorporation of 2F-Fuc was detected in the 200 microM treated condition on all days, when using a threshold of 0.2% of the peak area in the glycan analysis setting. The UPLC-MS data revealed low incorporation when reducing this threshold (data not shown). The highest incorporation of fluorinated fucose relative to the total fucosylation was detected on day 12 with 4.7%, when 800 microM 2F-PerAcFuc was applied. Altogether, a more effective reduction of the IgG fucosylation by 5-AlkFuc compared to 2F-Fuc was associated with a significant higher incorporation of the alkynylated fucose analogue. Therefore, higher 2F-Fuc concentrations may be more favorable compared to 5-AlkFuc.
The 5-AlkFuc analogue was detected in three different glycan structures, which have been identified as biantennary complex containing either zero or one galactose as listed in Table 2. The main detected specie was G0F* with a relative abundance of 4.6% on day 12. The second glycan that showed incorporation was G1F* with 0.8% and lastly G0F*-N. This trend indicates that incorporation of the analogues is not influenced by a preference of the FUT8 for an acceptor glycan.
Incorporation of monosaccharide analogues may be desired e.g., in the context of antibody drug conjugation to define a specific conjugation position. In case of biosimilar development, the incorporation of analogues is rather undesired. These data highlight the importance of a proper glycan analytic enabling the detection of undesired incorporation. Additionally, the selection of an appropriate inhibitor as well as the applied concentration have to be selected carefully to achieve the intended final amount of core fucosylation.
