Multivariate data analysis of growth medium trends affecting antibody glycosylation.
Abstract.
Use of multivariate data analysis for the manufacturing of biologics has been increasing due to more widespread use of data-generating process analytical technologies (PAT) promoted by the US FDA. To generate a large dataset on which to apply these principles, we used an in-house model CHO DG44 cell line cultured in automated micro bioreactors alongside PAT with four commercial growth media focusing on antibody quality through N-glycosylation profiles. Using univariate analyses, we determined that different media resulted in diverse amounts of terminal galactosylation, high mannose glycoforms, and aglycosylation. Due to the amount of in-process data generated by PAT instrumentation, multivariate data analysis was necessary to ascertain which variables best modeled our glycan profile findings. Our principal component analysis revealed components that represent the development of glycoforms into terminally galacotosylated forms (G1F and G2F), and another that encompasses maturation out of high mannose glycoforms. The partial least squares model additionally incorporated metabolic values to link these processes to glycan outcomes, especially involving the consumption of glutamine. Overall, these approaches indicated a tradeoff between cellular productivity and product quality in terms of the glycosylation. This work illustrates the use of multivariate analytical approaches that can be applied to complex bioprocessing problems for identifying potential solutions.
RESULTS.
We sought to generate a complex dataset from a model IgG1 antibody producing bioprocess for use in MVDA using the following commercially available media: Ex-Cell Advanced, OptiCHO, PowerCHO2, and ProCHO5. We used our in-house CHO DG44 cell line at an inoculation density of ~1 x 106 cells/ml. Nine micro bioreactors were prepared with each of the four media. One of the bioreactors containing Ex-Cell Advanced was lost, resulting in a total of 35 bioreactors successfully run. The bioreactors were operated within normal ranges found in bioprocessing with minor differences in the levels of nutrients supplemented. The micro bioreactors were run for 8 days, after which the mAb was collected and purified. Figure 1 displays technical dot plots with the final integrated viable cell density (IVCD) and specific productivity profiles categorized by culture medium, where each dot represents an individual micro bioreactor culture. The IVCD is a calculated variable that represents the cumulative viable cell density over the course of the whole bioreactor run, measured in cell-days/ml (further details for this variable, as well as the following metabolite values, can be found in Section 4.9). Cultures grown in Ex-Cell Advanced and PowerCHO2 have comparable IVCD, while this value is lowest in ProCHO5 and highest in OptiCHO. OptiCHO also featured the lowest specific productivity, which was roughly the same in the other media.
In-process measurements for the concentrations of glutamine (Gln), glucose (Glc), and lactate (Lac) were performed using a Bioprofile Flex Analyzer. We used the measured values to calculate the total specific amounts consumed/produced per cell within the micro bioreactors over the total culture life, the resultant technical dot plots of which are shown in Figure 2. Overall, OptiCHO featured the lowest consumption of glutamine and glucose while also producing the lowest amounts of lactate. Likewise, Ex-Cell Advanced had cultures that consumed/produced in the middle, while the highest consumers/producers were PowerCHO2 and ProCHO5 containing micro bioreactors.
Our next step was to assess if any of the differences we observed in the cell growth and nutrient profiles affected the glycosylation state of the IgG1 antibody that was produced. Due to the limited bioreactor volume size, the product mAb was only harvested at the end of the run; because the mAb accumulates in the vessel over time, the final harvest material is representative of the average mAb produced throughout the varied process conditions of the cell culture. Additionally, the average mAb will more closely resemble protein produced at the end of the cell culture due to more protein being produced at the higher cell densities that are reached in the latter stages of the process, and due to the cells' increased productivity as they enter the stationary phase during this time. The purified antibody was analyzed for its glycan profile and heavy chain size variants using mass spectrometry and capillary electrophoresis, respectively. The combined results for these analyses are shown in Table 1. The data in Table 1 is categorized by culture medium and analytical technique, as fluorescence mass spectrometry was used to quantify the numerical percentages of all the glycoforms, while reduced capillary electrophoresis (rCE-SDS) was used to compute the amount of aglycosylation antibody heavy chains. The results of all biological and three technical replicates each were mean averaged to obtain the values shown in Table 1; the values that are highest for each glycan type are bolded and underlined. Based on the glycan species we observed in our analysis, we used the following groupings: G0F, G1F, G2F, HM (this category contains Mannose 4 to Mannose 9 which consist of mannose oligosaccharide clusters bound to the 2 GlcNAc core), and Other (this category consists of the uncommon glycoforms such as G0F-N and nonfucosylated glycoforms like G0, G1, and G2). The "Other" category contained less than 5% of the overall glycans present. These groups of glycan species, HM and other, were created to help in data visualization and to simplify the data used to detect significant trends. The sum of terminal galactosylated species (G1F and G2F as opposed to G0F which features no galactosylation) varied greatly based on media: ProCHO5 cultures produced the most G1F and G2F of all the media tested, while OptiCHO produced the most G0F (more than G1F and G2F combined, 53.189% vs. 32.423%). These values could indicate that ProCHO5 medium promotes trafficking through the Golgi apparatus and/or galactosyltransferase enzymatic activity responsible for galactosylation more efficiently than in other media.22.
Culture medium is also associated with the abundance of HM glycoforms which can be characteristic of cellular stress and causes incomplete processing during N-glycan biosynthesis.6, 23, 24 This cellular stress can manifest differently, either as a reduction in galactosylation, or increases in either HM glycoforms or aglycosylation. For example, Ex-Cell Advanced cultures displayed the largest amounts of HM glycoforms, while PowerCHO2 had the most aglycosylation.
Table 1 shows that culture medium significantly affects the total product glycan profile. Nutrient related cellular stress can cause both an increase of immature glycoforms such as HM and an increase in antibody aglycosylation, but the conditions that result in production of aglycosylated mAbs are not well characterized and do not appear to overlap with those that result in immature glycoforms.16, 22 As mentioned earlier, glucose depletion has been shown to be responsible for aglycosylation outcomes, though we did not find any evidence of glucose deficiency in the PowerCHO2 vessels (Figure 2). We note that the conditions which result in aglycosylation do not appear to be correlated with those that result in low terminal galacosylation or increased HM species. Our work illustrates the need for fully characterizing the in-process parameters that result in altered glycosylation states that will modify the therapeutic properties of the antibody, especially when the drug mechanism requires Fc-binding ligands.
Due to the complex interplay between the different cellular functions affecting growth, metabolism, and glycan outcomes, we reasoned that data driven multivariate analysis would be required to understand the correlation structure that relates the harvested mAbs' quality and the in-process variables. Accordingly, the exact relationship between media selection and product quality is obscured for multiple reasons. First, the identities of the chemicals contained within commercial growth media are proprietary and unknown. Second, the relationship between the growth measurements, metabolite measurements and final product quality is governed by metabolic pathways containing complex reaction networks that have not been fully characterized. Due to this, we used MVDA techniques, such as PCA and PLS, to find a set of latent variables that describe the variability seen in the measured data and calculated variables when the exact biological relationship between model features is unknown. We only used the mass spectrometry data for the MVDA since mass spectrometry and rCE-SDS are vastly different techniques that measure attributes on different analytes.
PCA was performed to assess the suitability of using MVDA to characterize the impact of media selection on antibody glycosylation and productivity. The model's features, X, are comprised of only the titer and glycosylation profiles from each of the 35 micro bioreactors; the culture medium and other in-process variables were not included in this initial model, which is summarized in Table 2. Sevenfold cross-validation was used to determine Q 2 from predicted values of the excluded data. In order to prevent overfitting, the number of extracted principal components was selected to maximize Q 2; thus, the predictive power of the model was also maximized. More than 90% of the variabilities in the titer and glycosylation profiles are characterized by the two extracted principal components, while the high Q 2 value signifies that the results of the model have high predictive power and are not based on spurious correlations.
The PCA model extracted two principal components suggesting that there are two latent variables which characterize the impact of media selection on titer and product quality; the model's loadings, shown in Figure 3a, can provide insight into how the media selection has such an impact. The first principal component's loadings, p 1, show that the first principal component is inversely correlated with the immature HM and intermediary G0F glycoforms, as depicted by their location in the left side of the loadings plot. p 1 also indicates that the first principal component is positively correlated with the terminally galactosylated G1F and G2F glycoforms, as evidenced by their location in the right side of the loadings plot. Taken together, this suggests that the first principal component is characterizing the correlation structure that relates the impact of media selection on the cells' ability to achieve terminal galactosylation. This is also evident in the model's score space, shown in Figure 3b when considering the first principal component's scores, t 1. Cell cultures grown in OptiCHO are the least efficient at achieving terminal galactosylation, having the lowest sum of G1F and G2F species, and their projections appear furthest to the left in the score space. Moving to the right, it can be observed that Ex-Cell Advanced and PowerCHO2, which are moderately efficient at creating the terminally galactosylated species, appear next along t 1 near the central axis. Furthermore, it can be seen that cells grown in ProCHO5, which are the most efficient at achieving terminal galactosylation, appear furthest to the right by a significant margin; this is in good agreement with the univariate analysis derived from Table 1. Further evidence that the first principal component is correlated with the cells ability to achieve terminal galactosylation is provided in Figure 3C where the principal component regression (PCR) expressing the sum of terminally galactosylated species, [G1F + G2F] (%), as a linear function of the first principal component's scores, t 1, is able to capture almost all of the variability present in the amount of terminally galactosylated species (R 2 = 0.996). Interestingly, the proximity of the loading for titer to the origin suggests that the cells' ability to achieve terminally galactosylated glycoforms is independent of how productive the cells are.
The second principal component's loadings, p 2, show that the second principal component is inversely correlated with the intermediary G0F glycoform, as illustrated by its location in the bottom half of the loadings plot. p 2 also indicates that the second principal component is positively correlated with the immature HM glycoforms and titer, as portrayed by their location in the top half of the loadings plot. Taken together, this suggests that the second principal component is characterizing the correlation structure that relates the impact of media selection on the cells' ability to convert the immature HM glycoforms into the intermediary G0F glycoform. Cell cultures with lower projected scores on the second principal component, t 2, will be characterized by their small proportion of the HM glycoforms and relatively high proportion of the other glycosylation species; the inverse would be true of cell cultures whose projected scores, t 2, are large. This is consistent with the pattern observed in the score space: the cells grown in ProCHO5 and OptiCHO have the smallest amount of HM glycoforms and their projections appear in the bottom half of the score space in Figure 3b; cells grown in PowerCHO2 and Ex-Cell Advanced have the largest amount of HM glycoforms and their projects appear, largely, in the top half of the score space. This is also consistent with the univariate data in Table 1. Further evidence that the second principal component is correlated with the cells ability to convert HM glycoforms into the G0F glycoform is provided in Figure 3D where the PCR expressing the total amount of all G0F, G1F, and G2F glycoforms, [G0F + G1F + G2F] (%), as a linear function of the second principal component's scores, t 2, is able to describe a majority of the variability in the amount of intermediate and mature glycoforms (R 2 = 0.708).
In addition, the second principal component's loadings, p 2, suggest that the underlying metabolic phenomena responsible for converting the HM glycoforms into the G0F glycoform are inversely correlated with the metabolic phenomena responsible for increased protein production and that optimizing for titer could have deleterious effects on product quality, and vice versa. Further evidence for this can be seen in Figure 3e; it shows that the PCR that expresses titer as a linear function of t 2 is also able to describe a majority of the variability in titer (R 2 = 0.739). The fact that the slope of the regression in 3D is negative and the slope of the regression in 3E is positive is further evidence of the inverse relationship between cell productivity and efficiency in converting HM glycoforms to the G0F glycoform.
Having established a set of latent variables that can be used to discriminate between the productivity and glycosylation profiles resulting from cells grown in different media formulations, our next step was to determine if there were metabolic differences in the various cell cultures that were correlated with the observed titers and glycosylation profiles. To accomplish this, a PLS model was created where the response features, Y, were comprised of the titer and glycosylation profiles and the regressor features, X, contained 32 variables related to growth, metabolite uptake, and metabolite secretion. Specifically, the regressor features were: growth rate (Day 5), IVCD24 (Days 6 and 7), specific glutamine uptake rate (Days 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5), specific glucose uptake rate (Days 1, 2, 3, and 6), specific lactate secretion rates (Days 5 and 6), specific glutamine uptake24 (Days 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6), cumulative specific glutamine uptake (Days 1, 2, and 3), specific glucose uptake24 (Days 3, 4, and 6), cumulative specific glucose uptake (Days 3, 4, 5, and 6) and specific lactate production24 (Day 6). Table 2 contains the model summary statistics: the R 2(X) and R 2(Y) values indicate that over 80% of the process measurement variabilities and over 70% of the titer and glycosylation profiles variabilities, respectively, are embodied by the three principal components extracted by the model. It can be seen that despite extracting more principal components the PLS model is able to describe less of the titer and glycosylation variabilities than is described by the PCA model, as evidenced by the PLS model's R 2(Y) value being lower than the PCA model's R 2 value. This is a necessary consequence of trying to find the correlation structure in the process measurements that are related to the changes in titer and glycosylation. Not all process measurements that affect titer and glyocsylation have been measured; therefore, only the titer and glycosylation variabilities that are correlated with the process measurements should be characterized by the PLS model. The high Q 2 value, relative to the R 2 values, indicates that the PLS model has good predictive power and is not based on spurious correlations.
Figure 4a,c shows the score space and loading weights plots, respectively, for the PLS model. The Y block features' loading weights, shown as blue circles in Figure 4c, have a very similar pattern to the one observed in the PCA model's loadings depicted in Figure 3a. This indicates that the first two principal components extracted by the PLS model can be interpreted as characterizing the same phenomena as those extracted by the PCA model: the first principal component is positively correlated with the cells' ability to achieve terminally galactosylated glycoforms and the second principal component is positively correlated with titer and inversely correlated with the cells' ability to convert the immature HM glycoforms into the intermediary G0F glycoform. However, even though the pattern of the Y block features' loading weights in Figure 4c is similar to the pattern of the loadings in Figure 3a, there are some small differences that could affect the relevance of the PCA model's interpretation for the PLS model. This is most evident by comparing the PLS model's score space, Figure 4a, with the PCA model's score space Figure 3b. There are still clusters for each of the four media types, and the clusters are located in similar regions of the score space for both models; however, the distributions of these clusters are substantially different, especially along the second principal component.
The PCA model's interpretation is most relevant for the PLS model when considering only the PLS model's first principal component. Moving across the score space in Figure 4a from left-to-right, OptiCHO has the lowest amount of terminal galactosylation, followed by Ex-Cell Advanced and PowerCHO2 having an intermediate amount of terminal galactosylation and ProCHO5 having the most terminal galactosylation by a large margin. Further evidence that the latent variables from both models are correlated with the same underlying biological phenomena can be seen by performing a PCR that expresses [G1F + G2F] (%) as a linear function of the PLS model's first principal component's scores, t 1, shown in Figure 4b, and comparing it with the PCR for the PCA model, shown in Figure 3c. The PLS model captured less of the terminal galactosylation variability than the PCA model, R 2 = 0.684 versus R 2 = 0.966, respectively. This implies that up to two-thirds of the terminal galactosylation variabilities observed are correlated with the growth and metabolite measurements used as regressors in the X block. It also implies that at least one-third of the differences in terminal galactosylation observed cannot be attributed to factors considered in this work. The distribution of the observations on the PCR in Figure 4b suggests that the measured process parameters are correlated with the large changes in terminal galactosylation seen between media but that they are not correlated with the subtler terminal galactosylation variabilities seen within each media. Therefore, the model is well-suited for establishing the correlation structure between terminal galactosylation and the growth/metabolite utilization that occurs in cells grown in the different media conditions.
The relationship between the overall glycosylation enzymatic pathway efficiency and cellular metabolism can be interpreted from the loadings weights for the first principal component (w*c 1) in Figure 4c. In order to make the loading weights more interpretable all parameters related to glucose are plotted with a single type of marker (upside down triangle), and the same was done for the parameters related to growth, glutamine (triangle) and lactate (star) as well. Darker marker coloration indicates earlier in batch age, while light coloration signifies the end of the batch. The binary relationship between each response and regressor can be found in the model's coefficients given in Figure S1. As the overall terminal galactosylation efficiency is positively correlated with the first principal component, the in-process variables whose loading weights fall in the left-half of Figure 4c are inversely correlated with the cells ability to achieve terminal galactosylation and those variables whose loading weights fall in the right-half of Figure 4c are positively correlated with the cells ability to achieve terminal galactosylation. Thus, it can be seen that terminal galactosylation efficiency has a strong positive correlation with glucose consumption throughout the batch, a moderate inverse correlation with cell growth at the end of the batch, a moderate positive correlation with lactate production at the end of the batch and an ambiguous relationship with glutamine consumption. In this context, the strength of the correlation is determined by the loading weights proximity to the origin and is only meant to imply strength relative to one another for this principal component.
These results imply that cells whose metabolic processes utilize more glucose should be more likely to create protein that has achieved terminal galactosylation. It is important to note that because a design of experiments (DoE) was not performed to independently set X block measurements, a causal relationship between glucose utilization and glycosylation efficiency was not established; we are claiming that differences in media composition impact aspects of cellular metabolism responsible for glucose utilization and aspects of cellular metabolism responsible for achieving terminal galactosylation and that there appears to be a positive correlation between these two processes. The loading weights at the end of the culture, Days 5, 6, and 7, provide more detail to the interpretation; they imply that lactate production is positively correlated with terminal galactosylation efficiency and growth is inversely correlated with terminal galactosylation efficiency. Together, we interpret this as suggesting that cells achieving a high degree of terminal galactosylation are utilizing the increased amount of glucose as an energy source at the end of the culture, as evidenced by the positive correlation with lactate production, but this energy is being used by metabolic processes unrelated to growth, as evidenced by the inverse correlation with cell growth.
Examining the score values for the second principal component, t 2, in Figure 3b for the PCA model and in Figure 4a for the PLS model it is clear that the second principal component does not describe the same phenomena in the PLS model as in the PCA model--at least not in the same way. It will be shown here that the tradeoff between productivity and the conversion of HM species to G0F captured by the PCA model in a single latent variable may be described more completely by two latent variables with one of them being correlated with this tradeoff and the second one that is correlated with the aspects of productivity that are independent of the conversion of HM to G0F. These two phenomena are captured by principal Components 2 and 3 in the PLS model whose score space can be seen in Figure 5a.
It can be seen from Figure 5b that the second principal component is positively correlated with titer from the PCR that expresses titer as a function of t 2. However, the fraction of variability in the titer measurements described by t 2 in the PLS model is roughly half of that described by t 2 in the PCA model (R 2 = 0.377 vs. R 2 = 0.739, respectively). The remaining fraction of variability in the titer measurement is described by the third principal component, as shown by the PCR in Figure 5d that expresses titer as a linear function of t 3 (R 2 = 0.389). Furthermore, a multiple linear regression that expresses titer as a function of t 2 and t 3 captures the majority of the variability seen in the titer measurements (R 2 = 0.766), as seen in Figure 5e; this is comparable to the fraction of variability captured by a single component in the original PCA model (R 2 = 0.739).
It can be seen from Figure 5c that the second principal component is also inversely correlated with the cells ability to convert HM glycoforms to G0F from PCR that expresses [G0F + G1F + G2F] (%) as a function of t 2 (R 2 = 0.531). Unlike titer, a second PCR (Figure 5f) that expresses [G0F + G1F + G2F] (%) as a function of t 3 indicates that the cells ability to convert HM glycoforms to G0F is not correlated with the latent variable extracted into the third principal component (R 2 = 0.003). Together, this implies that only the second principal component represents the tradeoff between productivity and converting HM to G0F. The high R 2 value for the PLS model relative to the PCA model, R 2 = 0.531 versus R 2 = 0.708, respectively, indicates that 15% or more of the variability in the cells ability to convert HM glycoforms to G0F that was captured by the PCA model is not related to the growth and metabolite factors considered here.
Similar to the analysis of loadings from the PCA model, the loading weights from the PLS model, shown in Figure 5g, can provide insight into how the growth and metabolite measurements relate to the productivity and product quality outcomes. The second principal components' loading weights, w*c 2, can be analyzed by considering those loading weights that fall in the right-half of Figure 5g as being positively correlated with titer and inversely correlated with the cells' ability to convert immature HM glycoforms to G0F; the opposite is also true for those loading weights that fall in the left-half of the plot. Therefore, it can be seen that cell cultures with elevated glutamine consumption during the lag and early exponential growth phases (Days 0-4), but lowered glutamine consumption during the stationary phase (Days 5 and 6) tended to result in both more protein, and protein that contained a higher proportion of immature HM glycoforms. For analogous reasons, the loading weights suggest that cultures consuming lowered levels of glucose and producing lowered levels of lactate during the stationary phase (Days 5 and 6) tended to result in more protein which contained a higher proportion of immature glycoforms. Similarly, an analysis of the loading weights for principal Component 3, w*c 3, suggest that cultures with elevated glutamine consumption during the exponential growth phase (Days 2-5) tend to produce more protein and cultures with lowered levels of glucose consumption and lactate production during the stationary phase (Days 5 and 6) tended to result in more protein as well.
Taken together, these results suggest that cells that utilize more glucose for energy during the stationary phase of the culture will also result in cells with lower productivity. It should be noted again that we are not suggesting the aspects of metabolism related to consuming glucose for energy have a causal relationship with the aspects of metabolism related to protein production; rather we are suggesting that media selection has an impact on both of these aspects of cellular metabolism and that there appears to be an inverse correlation between these two processes. In addition, the results indicate that cells that consume more glutamine during the lag and exponential phases tend to produce more protein. The elevated consumption of glutamine during the lag phase appears to come at a cost: the cells that consume elevated levels of glutamine during the lag phase also tend to consume less glutamine during the stationary phase and produce protein that has a lower degree of G0F, G1F, and G2F glycoforms. However, elevated levels of glutamine consumption during the exponential growth phase does not appear to suffer from this drawback, as cells with elevated glutamine consumption during the exponential growth phase tended to produce more protein without having an effect on the cells' ability to convert HM glycoforms to G0F.
