Osmolality Effects on CHO Cell Growth, Cell Volume, Antibody Productivity and Glycosylation.
The addition of nutrients and accumulation of metabolites in a fed-batch culture of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells leads to an increase in extracellular osmolality in late stage culture. Herein, we explore the effect of osmolality on CHO cell growth, specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) productivity and glycosylation achieved with the addition of NaCl or the supplementation of a commercial feed. Although both methods lead to an increase in specific antibody productivity, they have different effects on cell growth and antibody production. Osmolality modulation using NaCl up to 470 mOsm kg-1 had a consistently positive effect on specific antibody productivity and titre. The addition of the commercial feed achieved variable results: specific mAb productivity was increased, yet cell growth rate was significantly compromised at high osmolality values. As a result, Feed C addition to 410 mOsm kg-1 was the only condition that achieved a significantly higher mAb titre compared to the control. Additionally, Feed C supplementation resulted in a significant reduction in galactosylated antibody structures. Cell volume was found to be positively correlated to osmolality; however, osmolality alone could not account for observed changes in average cell diameter without considering cell cycle variations. These results help delineate the overall effect of osmolality on titre and highlight the potentially negative effect of overfeeding on cell growth.
2. Results and Discussion.
2.1. Effect of Hyperosmolality on Cell Growth and Metabolism.
We first evaluated the effect of hyperosmolality on the specific cell growth rate and metabolic activity in cultures grown in flasks. Hyperosmolality is typically caused by the repeated addition of feeds and the accumulation of metabolic by-products in fed-batch cultures. The effect of hyperosmolality has previously been studied by adding NaCl to the culture medium. However, comparing the NaCl method of osmolality increase to nutrient spiking has not been explored in the literature. Herein, we added either NaCl or Feed C to the culture medium before inoculation to achieve a range of initial osmolality values between 320 and 500 mOsm kg-1. As shown in Figure 1, increased osmolality caused a considerable reduction in the maximum specific cell growth rate in both cases. The difference in maximum growth rate under the two types of treatment was not statistically significant (p > 0.05).
Equation (1) represents the line of best fit for the growth rate from the average Feed C and NaCl dataset presented in Figure 1. This osmolality change is responsible for a 50% reduction in the maximum proliferation rate.
This function is only linear in the examined range of osmolality, as decreasing the osmolality below 320 mOsm kg-1 may lead to a reduced specific growth rate as a result of lower nutrient abundance. The linear relationship is in line with other NaCl-spiked CHO cell cultures, where a slope of -9.3 x 10-5 was observed in comparison to -1.1 x 10-4 in this study.
The viable cell density profiles corresponding to these experiments are shown in Figure 2A. There is a clear reduction in growth rate as osmolality increases by either salt or feed addition. These findings show how the addition of unnecessary feed can severely inhibit cell growth, as seen clearly in the case of 500 mOsm kg-1 (Feed C addition). The particular feed used in this study is typically added at 10% v/v in every other day of culture, starting on day 2 (based on the manufacturer's instructions), but herein the feed was added on day 0. The maximum cell density is higher for the control in Figure 2A, which contradicts other published works about the effect of a spiked medium on a batch CHO cell culture's performance. The discrepancy in maximum cell density might be because the added feed in these published experiments is less than our minimum Feed C addition, i.e., 9% and 12% (v/v), respectively. Moreover, Feed C is commonly used in fed-batch cultures to prolong culture viability, whereas some of the previously reported spiked medium experiments were designed to boost productivity in batch cultures. The osmolality value increases during culture (Figure 2B) mainly due to the accumulation of extracellular lactate, Na+ and K+ (Figure 2, panels E, G and H, respectively).
The average cell diameter is positively correlated to osmolality up to day 5 (Figure 2C), with its value increasing sharply 24 h post-inoculation, particularly for the Feed C-supplemented cultures beyond 410 mOsm kg-1. This phenomenon is known as Regulatory Volume Increase and is noticeable when compared to the control. However, the trend changes from day 6 onwards, when key nutrients such as glucose and glutamate begin to be depleted from the control and NaCl-supplemented cultures (Figure 2F,I).
The ammonia concentration (Figure 2D) shows a gradual increase, but only three conditions exceed the 5 mM threshold, beyond which there is significant growth inhibition in this cell line. However, in all cases, this threshold was reached during the stationary phase or late stage culture and was likely not detrimental to achieving peak cell density. Figure 2E,F show the extracellular lactate and glucose profiles, respectively, where the shift from production to consumption of the former is only observed for the control and 320 mOsm kg-1 conditions. The remaining cultures exhibited sustained lactate production throughout the culture, which, in some cases of NaCl-supplemented cultures, appears to be coming from sources other than glucose. The shift from lactate production to consumption is believed to be dependent on culture pH and the intracellular redox state, which was not measured herein.
The concentrations of Na+ and K+ remain constant for most cases except the two higher osmolality cases of NaCl addition, which show a further increase in the last days of culture. This increase in K+ is in alignment with the steep cell size decrease of the 420 and 470 mOsm kg-1 cases, which could mean that the cells are undergoing apoptosis. Apoptotic shrinkage is associated with isosmotic cell shrinkage as a result of K+ loss. It has also been reported that elevated osmolality is associated with an increased apoptosis rate, although early apoptosis markers were not examined in this study. Glutamate (Figure 2I) was taken up by the cells, and some of it is hypothesised to have been channelled towards glutamine production (Figure 2J).
Proline and glycine betaine are known to act as osmoprotectants in mammalian cell culture. Spent media analysis has indicated that residual proline concentrations are at least 60% of the initial concentration in CD CHO basal medium (data not shown). Proline was therefore in abundance until harvest in all cultures.
Figure 3 shows the specific production and consumption rates of key metabolites for the exponential growth phase (i.e., calculated based on data from day 0 to day 6), during which we observed constant osmolality values. All cultures had higher specific glucose consumption rates compared to the control despite exhibiting lower specific cell growth rates. Regardless of the hyperosmolality treatment followed, the yield of lactate on glucose is higher as osmolality increases, pointing to inefficient carbon metabolism regardless of the induction method. It has been previously reported that the yield of lactate on glucose is increased at higher residual glucose concentrations. Indeed, our experimental results point to the same phenotype. Comparing the residual glucose concentrations among cultures with the same induction method (Figure 2F), we see that the higher the glucose concentration, the higher the production rate of lactate (Figure 3E) during the cell growth period (initial adaptation period of two days followed by exponential cell growth). This behaviour continues during late stage culture, with the two cultures under normal osmolality conditions (control and 370 mOsm kg-1 NaCl) exhibiting a rapid decline in lactate concentration due to a reinternalisation of the metabolite by the cells as a carbon source (Figure 2E). In the case of the highest osmolality culture to which NaCl was added, a proportion of produced lactate appears to be coming from sources other than glycolysis. It has been previously reported that glutaminolysis can supply carbon and nitrogen in cancer cells, which are known to share similar metabolic features with CHO cells.
Interestingly, at osmolality values in the 410-420 mOsm kg-1 range, there is no significant difference in the ammonia production rate under the two hyperosmolality induction strategies. However, this changes in the 460-470 mOsm kg-1 range, in which NaCl cultures exhibit a significantly higher ammonia production rate (p < 0.05). Specifically, NaCl-supplemented cultures secrete more ammonia (Figure 3A) than Feed C-supplemented experiments. This is in line with the respective glutamine production rates, with the latter cultures using ammonia to synthesise and secrete glutamine at a higher rate than the former (Figure 3D). However, glutamate uptake/production rates do not follow the same pattern, with NaCl-supplemented cultures in the 460-470 mOsm kg-1 range consuming glutamate and Feed C-supplemented cultures secreting glutamate. Given that Feed C is rich in amino acids, we hypothesise that these cultures convert other amino acids to glutamate, which is then used to synthesise glutamine. Interestingly, the cultures at 500 mOsm kg-1 behave differently, showing increased ammonia and glutamate productivity and reduced glutamine secretion, pointing to different metabolic wiring under these high osmolality, nutrient-rich conditions.
2.2. Effect of Hyperosmolality on Titre and Specific Antibody Productivity and Glycosylation.
Figure 4 shows the mAb titre at harvest for all cultures and the respective integral viable cell density (IVCD) values. The highest titre was obtained at 410 mOsm kg-1, achieved with Feed C addition, which also displayed the highest IVCD, although the latter was not significantly different from that of the control cultures. At the other end, the 500 mOsm kg-1 Feed C cultures had the lowest IVCD and mAb titre. Overall, the titre broadly follows the same trend as the IVCD, with the 470 mOsm kg-1 NaCl cultures being the exception. Looking at the specific mAb productivity values in Figure 5, we can see that the 470 mOsm kg-1 NaCl cultures had the highest rate of mAb secretion out of all conditions. This is not only higher with respect to the control cultures, but also significantly higher than for all Feed C-supplemented cultures. Interestingly, cultures supplemented with NaCl show an increase in specific mAb productivity that is positively correlated with the value of osmolality, whereas the Feed C-supplemented cultures show no statistically significant difference among the three different osmolality values. This potentially stems from the fact that the latter cultures utilised nutrients less efficiently due to the high levels of glucose abundance. Additionally, the 470 mOsm kg-1 NaCl and 410 mOsm kg-1 Feed C cultures exhibited a noticeably larger cell diameter after day 6, as seen in Figure 2C. This observation could point to expanded organelles supporting mAb synthesis (e.g., ER and Golgi apparatus), which is manifested, in turn, with a higher specific productivity. Overall, our findings are in broad agreement with the approaches that were reviewed by O'Callaghan and James to enhance mAb production.
The effect of the two hyperosmolality induction methods on mAb glycosylation at harvest is illustrated in Figure 6. In the cultures supplemented with NaCl, there is no statistically significant difference in the glycan distribution (p > 0.05). However, cultures supplemented with increased amounts of Feed C showed a decline in G0F with increased osmolality values (18% difference between 410 and 500 mOsm kg-1). This was accompanied by an increase in G0 species (10% difference between 410 and 500 mOsm kg-1) and smaller increases in the percentage of galactosylated structures (G1F, G1'F and G2F). Lower levels of core-fucosylation and increased galactosylation, achieved either through genetic modifications or alternative feeding regimes, are desired attributes in mAb-glycosylation that have been found to enhance the activity and efficacy of the glycoprotein. Given that changes are manifested in both under-processed (G0) and more mature (G1F, G1'F and G2F) structures, it is difficult to pinpoint an underlying mechanism. However, it is unsurprising that the cultures exhibiting the highest specific productivity (410 mOsm kg-1 Feed C) also show an increased percentage of non-galactosylated structures. Given the high availability of nutrients in these cultures, it is likely that the intracellular availability of nucleotide sugars, the co-substrates for glycosylation, was not limiting. The high rate of antibody synthesis and secretion, on the other hand, may have limited antibody residence time in the Golgi, therefore reducing the extent of further glycan processing by b-1,4-galactosyltransferase (b4GalT), which is responsible for mAb galactosylation. In contrast to the expected elevated distribution of non-galactosylated structures, core-fucosylation shows an unexpected behaviour among the cultures that include the addition of Feed C for osmolality regulation. As shown in Figure 6, the highest osmolality condition (500 mOsm kg-1 Feed C) has significantly lower levels of core fucosylation than the 410 mOsm kg-1 Feed C samples (p < 0.05), despite having a lower specific antibody productivity. The aforementioned observation could indicate the inhibition of a-1,6-fucosyltransferase (FucT) enzymatic activity or reduced gene (Fut8) expression due to higher osmolality levels, assuming that the levels of GDP-fucose, the co-substrate of core fucosylation, are unaffected by the osmolality changes.
Several process parameters, such as culture pH, temperature and ammonia levels, have been found to considerably affect recombinant protein glycosylation. In principle, elevated ammonia levels result in increased intracellular pH conditions that inhibit b4GalT activity and expression, and consequently lead to reduced protein galactosylation. However, the cultures with osmolality levels of 320 mOsm kg-1, 420 mOsm kg-1 and 470 mOsm kg-1 that presented the highest ammonia concentrations at harvest (Figure 2) did not collectively demonstrate any significant reduction in IgG galactosylation (Figure 6). It is important to note that harvest samples correspond to different culture days, which is known to influence the glycan structures obtained. Typically, the glycosomal shifts to a higher abundance of under-processed structures as the culture progresses, which could partly explain the differences between the 500 mOsm kg-1 Feed C cultures, harvested on day 10, and the 410 mOsm kg-1 Feed C cultures, harvested on day 12. As the cultures were all harvested at 80% culture viability, the observed differences are not attributable to an accumulation of intracellular material from lysed cells. Interestingly, the results for the 500 mOsm kg-1 Feed C cultures are broadly aligned with the control culture data (harvested on day 8).
The two culture conditions under which cells exhibited the largest cell size increase, i.e., 410 mOsm kg-1 (Feed C) and 470 mOsm kg-1 (NaCl), had a relatively high specific productivity, but the former also had a higher proliferation rate. It is obvious that not all larger cells are high producers, but some of the high producers show a large volume phenotype (i.e., 15.7 mum and 14 pg/cell/day, in comparison to less than 14.3 mum and 3.2 pg/cell/day for low producing cells). The larger cell volume could indicate an increase in the volume of cellular organelles such as the ER, which would indicate an increased protein synthesis and folding capacity and, thus, a higher protein secretion rate under hyperosmolar conditions.
2.3. Effect of Hyperosmolality on Cell Volume.
Having explored the effect of hyperosmolality induced by feed and salt addition in the beginning of the CHO cell cultivation in flasks, we then looked at a set of typical fed-batch CHO cell cultures in bioreactors. The latter are better representatives of the typical production conditions, under which extracellular osmolality increases up to 70% above the initial value because of the feeding and excretion of metabolites, which has been previously reported to lead to an increase of up to four times in cell volume. Additionally, in the bioreactor environment we could effectively control the culture's pH, but also explore the effect of shifting the temperature to mild hypothermic conditions during exponential growth, which is a commonly employed strategy to prolong culture duration and achieve increased product titre.
In our bioreactor study, metabolism was more active at 36.5  C, with both glucose and lactate being consumed more readily than under mild hypothermia. This led to a slower increase in osmolality at 36.5  C for the same feeding schedule (Figure 7a). Plotting the average cell size as a function of osmolality illustrates the effect of osmolality on cell volume (Figure 7b). Outliers in cell size, such as the cell aggregates and fragments observed particularly in late stage culture, were removed from the data, limiting the diameter range to between 10 and 20 microm based on previous observations.
Although there appears to be a correlation between osmolality and cell volume, this is not sufficient to fully describe the data presented herein. For example, even though the largest cell size is observed at the end of culture, this did not correspond to the highest osmolality value, pointing to a potential threshold for the osmolality effect on cell volume. A secondary factor that could impact cell volume is cell cycle distribution, which also changes during culture. Two samples from the exponential phase (day 4) and stationary phase (day 9) from the bioreactors run at 36.5  C were analysed by flow cytometry, as shown in Figure 8. An increase in the proportion of cells in the G2/M phase was observed as the culture progressed, in parallel to an increase of the cells in the G1 phase (RNA content results are shown in Appendix A Figure A2).
The percentage of cells in G0/G1 is known to be the highest throughout the culture duration and usually increases in late stage culture. This has led to the assumption that cells are quiescent, arrested in G0. Distinguishing cells in G1 from those in G0 is important, as the former is more metabolically active than the latter.
The shift in cell volume in the bioreactor was also shown by analysing two samples from days 2 and 14 of the bioreactor samples (Figure A3). These figures show the difference in cell size of early and late days of cell culture. The increase in cell size is clearly shown where the smallest cell population in Q4 dropped from 74% to 56% and caused an increase in larger cell quarters Q2 and Q3. More importantly, the cell cycle distribution and increase in the G2/M phase at the later stage of culture likely contributes to the increase in average cell volume during the bioreactor runs beside the effect of osmolality.
In late stage culture we see a decrease in the average cell diameter. Regulatory Volume Decrease (RVD) is an adaptive mechanism achieved by the extrusion of intracellular osmotically active solutes up to reach the water balance imposed by the new condition. The osmolytes involved are the main intracellular ions K+ and Cl- and several small molecules, including amino acids, polyalcohol and amines. Another contributing factor is expected to be the increase in apoptotic cells, which would lead to cell shrinkage. Cell cycle distribution also contributes to the overall cell volume increase during culture based on the increase in the cell subpopulation in the G2/M phase seen in late stage culture.
Takagi et al. evaluated the effect of osmolarity on CHO cell growth rate, glucose consumption, lactate production and tepa productivity in adhesion and suspension cell culture. The critical osmolality value was 450 mOsm kg-1 for suspension culture and lower for adhesive cell culture. Their average reported cell diameter varies from 7.25 to 9.14 microm, which is smaller than the typical diameter values for CHO cells.
