Identification and characterization of a residual host cell protein hexosaminidase B associated with N-glycan degradation during the stability study of a therapeutic recombinant monoclonal antibody product.
Abstract.
Host cell proteins (HCPs) are process-related impurities derived from host organisms, which need to be controlled to ensure adequate product quality and safety. In this study, product quality attributes were tracked for several monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) under the intended storage and accelerated stability conditions. One product quality attribute not expected to be stability indicating is the N-glycan heterogeneity profile. However, significant N-glycan degradation was observed for one mAb under accelerated and stressed stability conditions. The root cause for this instability was attributed to hexosaminidase B (HEXB), an enzyme known to remove terminal N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). HEXB was identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics approach to be enriched in the impacted stability batches from mAb-1. Subsequently, enzymatic and targeted multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) MS assays were developed to support process and product characterization. A potential interaction between HEXB and mAb-1 was initially observed from the analysis of process intermediates by proteomics among several mAbs and later supported by computational modeling. An improved bioprocess was developed to significantly reduce HEXB levels in the final drug substance. A risk assessment was conducted by evaluating the in silico immunogenicity risk and the impact on product quality. To the best of our knowledge, HEXB is the first residual HCP reported to have impact on the glycan profile of a formulated drug product. The combination of different analytical tools, mass spectrometry, and computational modeling provides a general strategy on how to study residual HCP for biotherapeutics development.
RESULTS.
N-glycan degradation of mAb1 in a stability study.
N-glycan degradation was observed for an IgG1 molecule, mAb-1 during a real-time stability study at selected time points and temperatures (25 C and 40 C). Significant removal of GlcNAc in G0F and G1F and increase of G0F-GlcNAc and Core F was observed after 6 months of storage at 40 C by an Instant PC glycan assay (Figure 1). There was minor change at 6 months and 25 C, and no significant change of N-glycan profile was observed up to 12 months and 5 C (Tables S1 and S2). The glycan profile change was also detected by intact mass analysis by LC-MS (data not shown). In contrast, there was no major change of N-glycan in the stability study of mAb-2, mAb-3, and mAb-4 (Table S3). The N-glycan profile of mAb-1 remained unchanged following force degradation conditions including pH and light stress (data not shown), suggesting this N-glycan stability is likely not related to chemical stress. Therefore, it was proposed that residual HCP was responsible for the change in N-glycan profile in mAb-1. The process development of mAb-1 was improved by incorporating a second polishing column (Process 2) to further remove HCPs. Following the process change, no change in the N-glycan profile was observed (Table S3).
Identification and relative quantification of hexosaminidase B for N-glycan change.
The total immunoreactive HCP equivalents for mAb1 DS from Process 1 by a CHO ELISA kit ranged from 18 to 29 ppm (immunoequivalent ng of HCP/mg of mAb DS, n = 3). To identify which residual HCPs were the root cause for N-glycan GlcNAc removal, mAb-1 DS from Process 1 was analyzed by an LC-MS-based proteomics approach. HEXB was the only glycosidase identified, with 24 unique peptides (p < .01) and sequence coverage at 47.9% (Figure 2). To determine the relative abundance of HEXB by proteomics, five non-CHO recombinant proteins ranging from 10 ppm to 200 ppm were spiked in each sample to make the standard curves. The correlations (R 2) of the MS1 peak areas and the amount of the five spike-in proteins are over 0.95 (Figure 3). Relative quantification of HEXB calculated from the standard curve was determined to be 658 ppm (ng of HEXB/mg of mAb-1 DS) from two biological replicates (Table 1). This residual HCP was not identified in the drug substances of mAb-2, mAb-3, and mAb-4. After process optimization to remove HCPs in mAb-1 from Process 2, HEXB was identified by proteomics, but coverage was reduced to only six unique peptides identified. The relative quantification from proteomics analysis was calculated as 16 ppm from the standard curve (Table 1).
NAG enzyme activity.
Hexosaminidase (EC 3.2.1.52), also called N-acetyl-beta-d-glucosaminidase (NAG) in other species, have been reported to catalyze the hydrolysis of terminal GlcNAc residues from a variety of substrates. To determine the role of HEXB in mAb-1 glycan change, an enzyme activity assay was developed to calculate HEXB activity on GlcNAc hydrolysis in mAb-1 from Process-1 and Process-2 using NP-GlcNAc as the substrates. As shown in Figure 4, NAG hydrolysis activity is highly correlated with mAb-1 concentrations from both processes. mAb1 from Process 1 has much higher NAG activity than that from Process 2. As expected in Table 2, mAb-1 from Process-1 had the highest NAG activity among the four mAbs. mAb-1 from Process 2 showed more than 20-fold decrease in NAG activity. The decrease in NAG enzyme activity is consistent with the decreases in HEXB concentration in Process 2. NAG enzyme activities in mAb2, mAb3, and mAb4 are extremely low as expected from their below limit of identification of HEXB by proteomics.
Confirmation of NAG like activity as the root cause for GlcNAc removal in mAbs.
Due to the lack of high-quality recombinant CHO HEXB protein, a NAG enzyme with the same specificity as HEXB was used to confirm NAG enzyme activity as the root cause of N-glycan GlcNAc removal. Different concentrations of NAG were spiked in mAb-1 from Process 2 and in mAb-3. As shown in Figure 5a,b, the GlcNAc removal on mAbs can be replicated by adding NAG enzyme measured by the Instant PC N-glycan assay. Incubate of NAG at 40 C as short as 1 hr resulted in concentration-dependent decrease of G0F and increase of G0F-GlcNAc and CoreF, consistent with terminal GlcNAc removal from both mAbs.
Absolute quantification of HEXB by LC-MRM approach.
To help increase process understanding around the clearance of HEXB in mAb-1, an isotope dilution LC-MRM-based method was developed to measure the absolute level of HEXB in process intermediates from Process 1 and Process 2. As shown in Table 3, HEXB is decreased along with the purification steps. HEXB levels in the final DS of Process 1 and Process 2 were determined to be 214.9 ppm and 3.8 ppm, respectively. The abundance change is consistent with the relative quantification from the proteomics analysis and the enzymatic activity.
HEXB abundances in process intermediates from mAbs.
To gain additional understanding as to why HEXB was specifically observed in mAb-1 as a residual HCP, but not in mAb-2, mAb-3 and mAb-4, process intermediates from those 4 mAbs were tested by a proteomics approach. Based on proteomics data from the 4 mAbs (Table 4) and other mAb molecules in the pipeline (data not shown), there are no major differences of HEXB levels in the harvest cell culture fluid (HCCF) for mAbs from different cell lines. Surprisingly, the HEXB level was significantly higher in the Pro-A product (PAP) from mAb-1 compared to other mAbs. HEXB was not identified in mAb-2 and mAb-4 in PAP, and only a very low level of HEXB was identified from mAb-3 in PAP. As observed earlier in the proteomics analysis, HEXB was only identified in the mAb-1 DS, but not in other mAb DS lots.
Modeling of HEXB interaction with mAbs.
To investigate the potential interactions of HEXB with mAb-1, computational modeling was conducted to understand the possible interactions at a molecular level. First, the homology model of HEXB from CHO cell was constructed using the human HEXB X-ray structure as the template. The two proteins are highly homologous with a sequence identity of 73%. Multiple complex structures generated using MOE protein-protein docking with the homology models of HEXB and antibody Fab domain were ranked using the MOE docking score and clustered based on potential epitopes on HEXB. Since the binding interface was restrained to antibody CDRs, the docking poses display interactions mostly from residues in CDRs. The proposed complex structure of HEXB/mAb-1 was selected among different docking poses based on top docking score. This complex model (Figure 6a) suggests that the binding epitope of HEXB for mAb-1 encompasses domain II, near the single disulfide bond in domain II. Furthermore, the epitope is away from the HEXB dimer interface to allow HEXB dimer formation, a necessary determinant of its enzymatic activity. The binding models of HEXB with the other three antibodies, mAb-2, mAb-3, and mAb-4 are shown in Figure 6b-d, where the binding interfaces occupy a similar region on HEXB as in mAb-1.
Next, the molecular mechanics, generalized Born model and solvent accessibility (MMGBSA) approach method was applied to compute the binding free energy between HEXB and antibodies and to rank the relative binding affinity of all four antibodies. As shown in Figure 6e, these interaction energy estimates indicate mAb-1 has the lowest binding free energy to HEXB compared to other antibodies, implicating tighter binding of mAb-1 toward HEXB. This is consistent with proteomics observations that HEXB was only detected in mAb-1 DS and causes degradation of N-glycans on mAb-1. Consistent with binding energy, a larger buried surface area is calculated for the HEXB/mAb-1 interface compared to other mAbs, which supports stronger interactions between HEXB and mAb-1.
Risk assessment of HEXB in mAb1 on immunogenicity and product quality.
To understand the potential immunogenicity risk of HEXB, an in silico analysis of the risk posed by the HEXB protein was performed using EpiVax's ISPRI-HCP algorithm. This algorithm predicts the binding of HCP-derived peptides to human MHC class II. If HCP-derived peptides are bound by human MHC class II and are recognized by CD4+ T cells under the right conditions, then the CD4+ T cells can provide helper signals to B-cells that recognize the HCP and promote an antibody response. The relative risk of HEXB was compared to other known HCPs commonly co-purified with mAbs. As shown in Table 5, the EpiMatrix score of HEXB was lower than CXCL3, PLBL2, and HtrA serine peptidase 1. The number of EpiMatrix hits, or 9-mers with a predicted Z-score >= 1.64 that were unique to the CHO protein, and cross-conserved with a human homolog were compared. The HEXB sequence was associated with a higher number of unique hits than PLBL2, a known immunogenic protein, suggesting that it could pose an immunogenicity risk.
We next compared the JanusMatrix score of HEXB relative to other known CHO HCPs. This analysis compares the TCR facing amino acids of MHC class II epitopes from the HCPs and predicts cross-reactive epitopes that may be more likely tolerated. The HEXB sequence was associated with a high Janus score when compared to difficult-to-remove HCPs with the exceptions of CXCL3 and HtrA serine peptidase 1. This score implies that even though the identified epitopes in HEXB could bind with high affinity to prevalent MHC class II molecules, they may not drive T-cell responses because of their similarity to previously exposed human proteins with similar epitopes.
