Lactoyl leucine and isoleucine are bioavailable alternatives for canonical amino acids in cell culture media.
Abstract.
Increasing demands for protein-based therapeutics such as monoclonal antibodies, fusion proteins, bispecific molecules, and antibody fragments require researchers to constantly find innovative solutions. To increase yields and decrease costs of next generation bioprocesses, highly concentrated cell culture media formulations are developed but often limited by the low solubility of amino acids such as tyrosine, cystine, leucine, and isoleucine, in particular at physiological pH. This study sought to investigate highly soluble and bioavailable derivatives of leucine and isoleucine that are applicable for fed-batch processes. N-lactoyl-leucine and N-lactoyl-isoleucine sodium salts were tested in cell culture media and proved to be beneficial to increase the overall solubility of cell culture media formulations. These modified amino acids proved to be bioavailable for various Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and were suitable for replacement of canonical amino acids in cell culture feeds. The quality of the final recombinant protein was studied in bioprocesses using the derivatives, and the mechanism of cleavage was investigated in CHO cells. Altogether, both N-lactoyl amino acids represent an advantageous alternative to canonical amino acids to develop highly concentrated cell culture media formulations to support next generation bioprocesses.
The replacement of leucine and isoleucine by N-lactoyl amino acids in concentrated feeds enables the development of next generation fed-batch bioprocesses used to produce monoclonal antibodies or recombinant proteins.
RESULTS.
Solubility of Lac-AA.
To determine whether Lac-AA present a benefit compared to canonical AA, the solubility of Leu, Ile, and their respective N-lactoyl-amino acids, Lac-Leu, and Lac-Ile, was determined in water using saturated solutions and residual mass determination at 4, 20, 25, and 37 C. As shown in Table S1, the solubility of Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile was significantly higher when compared with the solubility of the respective canonical AA in water. For instance, the maximum solubility of Leu and Leu sodium salt at 25 C was 22.1 g/kg (pH 6.0) and 86.0 g/kg (pH 10.8), respectively, whereas the solubility of Lac-Leu sodium salt was 689.2 g/kg (pH 6.7). For Ile and Lac-Ile sodium salt, solubilities of 32.4 and 639.3 g/kg were observed at 25 C with a pH of 6.2 and 6.14, respectively. Altogether, these results indicate that Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile salts are suitable candidates to increase the solubility of cell culture media and feed formulations by replacement of their respective canonical AA. To confirm that Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile salts are highly soluble in complex CCM formulations at neutral pH, increasing amounts of Lac-AA were added to Cellvento  4Feed lacking Ile and Leu. Similarly, increasing amounts of Ile and Leu were added to the same feed formulation as a control (Figure S2). The pH was always adjusted to 7.0 +- 0.2 before each measurement. The maximum solubility of Leu and Ile in Cellvento  4Feed lacking Ile/Leu was found to be 90 mM and 105 mM, respectively. In contrast, the maximum soluble concentration (with a turbidity value below 5 NTU) of Lac-Leu was 590 mM, indicating that the Lac-AA is at least five times more soluble than Leu in the feed. For Lac-Ile, the maximum tested concentration of 950 mM was still soluble in the feed with a turbidity value below 5 NTU. This indicates that Lac-Ile is at least nine times more soluble than Ile in neutral pH Cellvento  4Feed lacking Ile/Leu.
Further experiments were designed to determine the maximum concentration that can be reached for a complex CCM formulation when Leu and Ile are replaced by their respective lactoyl derivatives. Data for Cellvento  4Feed (containing Ile and Leu) indicate that this formulation is insoluble at already 1.2x (160 g/L:turbidity value around 50 NTU). In contrast, if Leu and Ile are replaced with their equimolar concentration of Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile, the formulation is soluble until 200 g/L which indicates that the replacement of Leu and Ile by their respective N-lactoyl counterparts allows to increase by 54% the total concentration of a complex CCM formulation.
Stability of Lac-AA.
Limited reports are available about the stability of Lac-AA. Therefore, a new targeted LC-MS method was developed to monitor the stability of Lac-AA in complex feed mixtures. The method proved to be linear between 10 pmol and 400 pmol of Lac-AA injected on the column and was used to monitor the stability of Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile in Cellvento  4Feed lacking Ile and Leu and stored for 3 months, light protected, at either 4 C or RT. Results (Figure S3) indicate that the concentration of both Lac-AA stayed within the limit of +- 10% of the starting concentration during the whole storage period which indicates an overall good stability at both storage temperatures.
Bioavailability of Lac-AA in fed-batch processes.
To understand whether Lac-AA derivatives can replace Ile and Leu in feeds, small scale fed-batch experiments were performed in spin tubes with five distinct CHO cell clones. The positive control feed contained Ile and Leu and was compared to three different test feeds: the first feed contained Lac-Leu and Ile, the second contained Lac-Ile and Leu, and the third feed contained Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile. Equimolar ratios of Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile were added to the feed to match the concentrations of the canonical AA. The negative control feed was lacking Leu and Ile and was used to monitor the overall Leu and Ile consumption from the basal growth medium.
Results shown in Figure 1 indicate that independently of the cell lineage (CHOZN in Figure 1a-c; CHODG44 in Figure 1d and CHOK1 GS in Figure 1e) and the type of recombinant protein produced (three distinct IgG1 mAbs in Figures 1a, 1d, and 1e or two distinct fusion proteins in Figures 1b and 1c), neither growth nor titer were impacted by the replacement of Leu and Ile by their Lac-AA counterparts in the feed. In contrast, viable cell density (VCD) decreased rapidly after Day 7 or Day 10 when cells were fed with feed lacking Leu and Ile, indicating that these AA are essential for growth and survival as already known from previous reports (Zhang et al.,). Importantly, in this condition, the production of the recombinant protein of interest was drastically reduced after Day 7 or Day 10 for all the five tested cell lines, confirming the requirement for an external supply of BCAA through feeds.
To gain further insights into the mechanism of action of Lac-AA, important metabolic intermediates were quantified in the spent medium of fed-batch experiments performed with the CHOK1 GS clone. Ammonia levels were not impacted by the replacement of either Leu or Ile by their respective Lac-AA. However, a slight overall decrease in the reported NH3 values was observed when both AA were replaced simultaneously by Lac-AA. The negative control showed undetectable levels of ammonia between Day 7 and Day 12, followed by a NH3 release from dying/dead cells (Figure 2a). In contrast, cells fed with Lac-AA released more lactate compared to cells fed with canonical AA, especially after Day 7. The maximum lactate concentration reached 2.5, 3.1, and 3.2 g/L at Day 17 in the Lac-Leu, Lac-Ile, and Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile conditions, respectively (Figure 2b) whereas only 1.9 g/L lactate was measured in the control condition fed with the canonical amino acids.
Amino acid analysis in spent media showed differences in the concentration of all three BCAA when cells were fed with Lac-AA (Figure 2c-e). When Leu was replaced with Lac-Leu, the Leu concentration in the spent medium decreased continuously from Day 0 to Day 5 suggesting that leucine was not or very slowly formed from Lac-AA during the early exponential phase of the culture (Figure 2c). However, the measured values were higher than the concentrations measured in the negative control after Day 5 (no Leu), indicating that small amounts of Leu can be formed from Lac-Leu. After Day 7, the Leu concentration in the spent medium increased significantly reaching 81% of the starting concentration at Day 17. The same results were observed upon Lac-Ile feeding, with a slight release of canonical Ile from Lac-Ile between Day 5 and 7 followed by a more significant release after Day 7, yielding a final concentration of Ile similar to the control condition at Day 17 (Figure 2d). Interestingly, when replacing Leu with Lac-Leu, the consumption of Ile and Val was increased, indicating that the metabolism of all three BCAA is interdependent. When Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile were used together in the feed, the concentrations of Leu and Ile in the spent medium were similar to the conditions with single replacement, but the overall consumption of Val was increased (Figure 2e). Finally, the kinetics of Lac-AA consumption was further studied by quantifying Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile in the spent medium using targeted LC-MS. Results presented in Figure 2f confirm the slow consumption of the modified AA during the early exponential phase while the consumption was drastically increased after Day 7, suggesting an active cleavage mechanism, probably mediated by enzymes. This point will be investigated later.
Taken together, data presented in Figures 1 and 2 suggest that Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile can substitute canonical Leu and Ile at equimolar ratio in feed with no detrimental effect on cell growth and productivity but with a slight increase in lactate after Day 7. Results also suggest that Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile are converted into canonical amino acids mostly during the production phase of the fed-batch process.
Antibody critical quality attributes in fed-batch processes using Lac-AA.
In the next step, cQA of mAb1 were studied to understand whether the replacement of Leu and Ile by Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile may impact glycosylation, charge variant or aggregation profiles of this IgG1. Results (Figure 3) indicate that all the studied cQA presented comparable levels when produced using either canonical AA or Lac-AA.
Impact of lactate levels on cell growth and productivity.
Since higher lactate concentrations were found in the supernatant during the production phase upon usage of Lac-AA containing feed (Figure 2b), the impact of lactate spiking on the overall performance was investigated. Indeed, high concentrations of lactate in spent media during fed-batch bioprocesses are known to have detrimental effects on cell growth and IgG titer (Freund & Croughan,; Hartley et al.,; Zagari et al.,). With the CHOK1 GS clone, increasing amounts of exogenous lactate were spiked into the cell culture at Day 7, at the beginning of the production phase. Results (Figure 4) indicate that concentrations up to 4.6 g/L lactate on Day 7 had no effect on either VCD, viability or IgG titer, while 6.2 g/L lactate (or higher) had an effect of overall productivity. Indeed, the IgG titer on Day 14 was reduced significantly by 22% in the condition where 8.5 g/L lactate was spiked on Day 7. Altogether, these data suggest that the up to 3.2 g/L lactate found upon Lac-AA feeding are unlikely to affect process performance.
Optimization of Lac-AA concentrations to improve IgG yield.
The next experiment sought to determine the optimal concentration of Lac-AA in the feed. The aim was to reduce the quantity of required raw materials, circumvent the slightly higher lactate production and generate a highly concentrated feed. Results presented in Figure 5 indicate no change in VCD or titer for Lac-AA concentrations between 60% and 100% of the concentrations of the canonical AA. In contrast, reducing the Lac-AA concentration by 50% resulted in a slightly lower titer after Day 7. The viability in all the Lac-AA conditions was higher than the viability in the control condition (Figure 5b). When considering the released lactate (Figure 5b) and Ile concentrations (Figure 5c), the decrease in Lac-AA in the feed led to a dose dependent decrease of the concentration of both molecules after Day 7. A concentration of 70% Lac-AA was chosen for the subsequent bioreactor experiments.
To demonstrate that the high solubility of Lac-AA enables the development of highly concentrated feed formulations that can be added to the process through lower volumes, a bioreactor experiment was designed. The control condition was identical to the control condition in spin tube. The Lac-AA containing feed contained only 70% of the Lac-AA (compared to the canonical AA) and was concentrated two times compared with the control condition. Consequently, two times less volume was added on the respective feeding days, thus reducing the diluting effect of the feed on the product. To maximize the bioreactor utilization using a concentrated feed, the Lac-AA process started with a 12% higher volume compared to the control condition. Since the same seeding density was used, this lead to a higher absolute amount of cells inoculated at Day 0 in the concentrated process. Results (Figure 5d) indicate that the VCD was maintained at higher levels after Day 9 in the Lac-AA condition. Interestingly, the addition of a concentrated feed in a process starting with higher medium volume and thus higher absolute amounts of cells afforded an increase in the IgG yield by 58% on Day 14, suggesting the productivity benefits can be obtained using concentrated processes.
Mechanism of Lac-AA cleavage.
To investigate whether the release of canonical AA from Lac-AA is mediated by enzymes, both modified AA were incubated with cell lysates from CHOK1 GS clone and the release of Leu, Ile, and lactate was monitored over time. Results indicate that the release of both lactate and canonical AA was linear with time (not shown) and was dependent on the protein concentration of the lysate (Figure 6a). The release was higher at 37 C compared with RT and was completely inhibited when lysates were pre-incubated at 100 C, supporting the hypothesis of an enzyme mediated Lac-AA cleavage. The release of lactate and the respective canonical AA was recorded with a stochiometric ratio close to 1:1, even though the lactate concentrations were always slightly lower than the AA concentrations probably indicating a further oxidation to, for example, pyruvate.
As was published elsewhere (Jansen et al.,), the protein CNDP2 enables the synthesis of N-lactoyl-phenylalanine when incubated with its precursors phenylalanine and lactate. Since this enzyme is reported as a nonspecific dipeptidase, we hypothesized that it may also cleave Lac-Leu and Lac-Ile. In fact, release of lactate and respective free AA (i.e., Leu and Ile, Figure 6b) was observed upon incubation of lac-AA with recombinant CNDP2 enzyme. The reaction was time dependent but nonlinear and reached saturation after 6 h of incubation.
Finally, to confirm that CNDP2 is expressed by CHO cells, a proteomic characterization of a CHO GS cell lysate was performed. A sample collected on Day 10 from the control process was compared to a sample collected on the same day from the Lac-AA process. About 1179 proteins were quantified with at least three unique peptides (Table S2). CNDP2 was identified in both samples at the same level confirming that CHO cells express this dipeptidase, and suggesting that the amount of endogenous CNDP2 might be sufficient to cleave Lac-AA. When looking at the entire data set using a volcano plot (Figure 6c), no protein was over- or underexpressed in the Lac-AA condition compared with the control (fold threshold of 2, q value < 0.01), suggesting no major change at the protein level upon usage of Lac-AA. Altogether, these results suggest that Lac-AA are very likely cleaved by intracellular enzymes such as CNDP2, a dipeptidase proved to be expressed by CHO cells. CNDP2 was able to cleave Lac-AA in vitro as shown in Figure 6b and is thus likely to at least participate in the release of bioavailable canonical AA in cell culture.
