Impact of iron raw materials and their impurities on CHO metabolism and recombinant protein product quality.
Abstract.
Cell culture medium (CCM) composition affects cell growth and critical quality attributes (CQAs) of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and recombinant proteins. One essential compound needed within the medium is iron because of its central role in many cellular processes. However, iron is also participating in Fenton chemistry leading to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) causing cellular damage. Therefore, this study sought to investigate the impact of iron in CCM on Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line performance, and CQAs of different recombinant proteins. Addition of either ferric ammonium citrate (FAC) or ferric citrate (FC) into CCM revealed major differences within cell line performance and glycosylation pattern, whereby ammonium was not involved in the observed differences. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis identified varying levels of impurities present within these iron sources, and manganese impurity rather than iron was proven to be the root cause for increased cell growth, titer, and prolonged viability, as well as altered glycosylation levels. Contrary effects on cell performance and protein glycosylation were observed for manganese and iron. The use of low impurity iron raw material is therefore crucial to control the effect of iron and manganese independently and to support and guarantee consistent and reproducible cell culture processes.
RESULTS.
Effect of increasing iron amounts in CCM on cell performance and IgG quality attributes.
To understand whether increasing amounts of iron in CCM impact cell performance and the quality of the produced recombinant antibody, a small-scale iron dose response fed-batch experiment was performed in spin tubes with cell line 1. Therefore, increasing amounts of FAC, a commonly used iron source in CCM, were spiked to iron deficient Cellvento  4CHO to obtain iron concentrations of 2, 10, 50, and 100 mg/L. As shown in Figure 1, the cell performance was significantly impacted by the addition of increasing FAC concentrations. For instance, VCD on day 10 was higher for 10, 50, and 100 mg Fe/L compared to 2 mg Fe/L (absolute increase of 19.2%, 20.0%, and 16.8%, respectively) (Figure 1a). However, the increase in cell growth led to a faster decrease in viability (Figure 1b). The highest final titer (D17) was detected for 2 mg Fe/L even though the IgG concentration was higher for 50 mg Fe/L until D14 (Figure 1c), suggesting that 50 mg Fe/L may be more suitable for commercial processes where the harvest is commonly performed at viabilities above 80%. The iron concentration decreased significantly during the course of the fed-batch process for 10, 50, and 100 mg Fe/L, and the absolute decrease in iron concentration over time increased with increasing iron concentration (Figure 1d). Since FAC was used as iron source, higher ammonium concentrations were detected at day 0 for higher applied iron concentrations in the medium. However, the produced metabolic ammonium amount for all tested conditions was similar for the following days (Figure 1e), indicating that the starting concentration is not likely to impact cell metabolism. Iron deficient medium led to no cell growth and no titer production highlighting the necessity of iron in CCM to maintain essential cellular functions (data not shown).
To investigate the effect of increasing FAC concentrations on mAb1 CQAs, aggregation and glycosylation profiles were determined by SEC-UV and CGE-LIF, respectively. Therefore, samples of day 10 of the fed-batch process were analyzed for which cell culture viability was comparable and still very high for all conditions allowing the evaluation of only iron source-related effects on CQAs. For the aggregation profile, a small dose-dependent increase in high molecular weight (HMW) species from 0.9% (2 mg Fe/L) to 2.8% (100 mg Fe/L) was observed with increasing FAC amounts in the medium, which inversely correlated with the detected decrease of the main peak (Figure 2a). Glycosylation pattern demonstrated a significant dose-dependent effect. With increasing iron amounts in the medium from 2 to 100 mg/L, the level of terminal galactosylated species increased from 13.3 to 25.6%, which inversely correlated with the observed decrease in terminal N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) level. Detected terminal sialylation, mannosylation and non-identifiable species within mAb1 were below 0.7%, 1.4%, and 1.2%, respectively (Figure 2b) and were not impacted by iron. Altogether, the results indicate that increasing FAC concentrations are responsible for an increase in maximal VCD and a decrease in cell culture viability, while causing a slight increase in HMW species and an elevated level of terminal galactosylation species for mAb1.
Effect of ammonium on cell performance and IgG quality attributes.
To investigate whether ammonium, introduced by FAC, is responsible for the observed changes in cell performance and CQAs, 0, 0.236 mM, 1.400 mM, and 2.855 mM of ammonium chloride were added to Cellvento  4CHO medium containing 2 mg Fe/L (added in the form of FAC). This resulted in the same ammonium concentrations like for iron concentrations of 2, 10, 50, and 100 mg/L in form of FAC. Upon increasing amounts of supplemented ammonium, maximal VCD was decreased absolutely by 7.9%, 19.0%, and 11.1% in comparison to 2 mg Fe/L, but no dose-dependent effect was observed (Figure 3a). No difference in viability was detected until D14 of the fed-batch process (Figure 3b), whereas IgG concentration was only slightly decreased upon 2.855 mM ammonium compared to the other tested conditions (Figure 3c). Differences in ammonium concentration were observed for day 0, but the produced amount of metabolic ammonium was the same for all tested concentrations during the course of the fed-batch (Figure 3d), indicating no significant impact of ammonium on cell metabolism. For the two tested CQAs aggregation and glycosylation (Figure 3e,f), no change was detected upon ammonium addition to CCM. Absolute differences for HMW and main peak species were below 0.2% and for glycosylation species below 0.9% for the tested conditions. Overall, these data suggest that ammonium present in FAC is neither responsible for increased cell performance, nor does it lead to elevated levels of HMW or terminal galactosylation species.
Impact of different iron sources, FAC and FC, on cell performance and IgG quality attributes.
Since increasing amounts of ammonium did not account for the observed differences in cell performance and CQAs upon increasing FAC concentrations, a second iron source, namely FC, was investigated. FC was selected due to the similar chelation strength and the absence of ammonium. Chosen iron concentrations were 2, 10, 50, and 100 mg/L and were added to iron deficient Cellvento  4CHO medium. As shown in Figure 4, usage of FC as iron source in CCM caused a lower cell growth with a reduced maximal VCD of 7.4%, 28.9%, and 3.5% for 10, 50, and 100 mg Fe/L, respectively, compared to the corresponding FAC condition (Figure 4a). For both iron sources, a faster decrease in viability was detected with increasing iron concentrations, whereas an even faster decline in viability was observed for each tested FC concentration compared to the corresponding FAC condition (Figure 4b). Titer profiles showed only slight variations between the different tested iron sources (Figure 4c). Overall, the faster decline in VCD and viability upon usage of FC compared to FAC is independent of the iron level, suggesting that both iron sources present other differences.
To investigate whether FC has a different impact on mAb1 CQAs than FAC, glycosylation and aggregation profiles on day 10 of the fed-batch process were analyzed. These samples were used to directly compare them to the previously analyzed samples upon FAC usage, although viability was already significantly different for FC on day 10. Table 1 summarizes the mAb1 glycosylation pattern of the two main species found upon usage of either FAC or FC in CCM. Whereas increasing levels of FAC in the CCM led to increased levels of terminal galactosylation with 13.3% for 2 mg Fe/L and up to 25.6% for 100 mg Fe/L, FC caused a decrease in terminal galactosylation species from 11.5% for 2 mg Fe/L to 8.0% for 50 mg Fe/L, which was inversely correlated with terminal GlcNAc levels. These data suggest again that the observed differences in glycosylation between FAC and FC are independent of the iron concentration and impacted by unidentified attributes between both iron sources.
Aggregation profile upon FC usage showed the same small dose-dependent increase in HMWs for increasing iron amounts like FAC (data not shown).
Altogether, the results obtained with increasing amounts of FAC and FC indicate that attributes other than iron and ammonium levels impact growth, viability, and IgG glycosylation.
Analysis of trace element impurities in FAC and FC.
Since it is known from literature that iron sources can be contaminated with trace elements, the next step focused on trace element characterization of both iron sources because trace elements in general are known to influence cell performance and product quality. Trace element impurity levels of FAC as well as FC were determined by ICP-MS analyses. Table 2 summarizes all elemental impurities showing values above 3 mug/g for at least one iron source. Whereas some elements such as magnesium (Mg), aluminum (Al), calcium (Ca), titanium (Ti), vanadium (V), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), and gallium (Ga) were only detected within FAC, other elements such as boron (B) and potassium (K) showed higher levels in FC and were not detected in FAC. For chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), and nickel (Ni), higher levels were measured in FAC compared to FC. Since manganese is well described as a modulator of antibody galactosylation and the manganese amount present as impurity in the FAC iron source contributed to more than 94% of the total manganese concentration in the CCM formulation, this element was considered as highly relevant. Other impurities such as copper and zinc, that are also known to impact cell culture performance and CQAs, contributed to less than 15% of the final medium concentration and were thus deemed less impactful and were not studied further. Based on these assessments, the increased manganese impurity in FAC raw material compared to FC iron source was hypothesized to be the major trigger for increased galactosylation and prolonged viability upon usage of FAC.
Effect of high and low manganese-contaminated iron sources on cell performance and IgG quality attributes.
Since ICP-MS results showed a variation of manganese impurity within the used iron sources FAC and FC, a comparison of two similar iron sources, differing significantly in manganese impurity level, was studied further. As no low impurity FAC iron source was available on the market, all further studies were performed with FC, for which a low and high impurity iron source existed. These two FC iron sources, named in the following as FCPurch (high level of manganese impurity; 530 mug Mn/g FC [impurity profile presented in Table S1]) and FCSynt (low level of manganese impurity; 0.36 mug Mn/g FC), were supplemented to iron deficient CCM in three different iron concentrations (10, 50, and 100 mg Fe/L) and a fed-batch with cell line 1 was performed. Additionally, for each chosen iron concentration, a third condition was tested, where manganese was supplemented to FCSynt (FCSynt + Mn2+) to match the concentration present in the corresponding FCPurch condition. Results (Figure 5) indicate a higher cell growth for FCPurch compared to the respective FCSynt independently of the iron concentration, whereas the supplementation of manganese to FCSynt led to a recovery of the VCD similar to the manganese impure FCPurch (Figure 5a). Upon usage of either FCPurch or FCSynt supplemented with manganese, a prolonged viability was observed in comparison to the respective FCSynt condition (Figure 5b). IgG concentrations for FCPurch and FCSynt supplemented with manganese were higher compared to IgG concentrations detected for FCSynt indicating the positive impact of manganese on productivity (Figure 5c). mAb1 HMW species level was lower than 5.5% for all tested conditions and the absolute difference was smaller than 3.3% for each tested iron concentration. The detected main peak level for mAb1 was above 94.5% for all tested conditions (Figure 5d). Glycosylation results indicate that manganese, either present as impurity or supplemented to CCM, significantly increased terminal galactosylation levels. Average absolute increase in terminal galactosylation species for FCPurch and FCSynt + Mn2+ in comparison to FCSynt was above 22.5%. For FCSynt, a slight decrease in terminal galactosylated level with increasing iron concentration was observed (Figure 5e).
In order to investigate the positive effect of manganese in more detail, increasing amounts of manganese were supplemented to FCSynt containing CCM with 10 mg Fe/L and a small-scale fed-batch experiment with cell line 1 was performed. Increasing amounts of manganese in the medium led to an overall increased cell performance (Figure 6). Maximal VCD on day 10 for 0.98 muM Mn2+ was significantly increased (+49.1%, p-value <0.001, non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test for multiple-group comparison with subsequent Dunn's test) compared to the FCSynt control (Figure 6a). Furthermore, increasing amounts of manganese in CCM led to prolonged viabilities (Figure 6b). Significantly higher final titers compared to the non-supplemented FCSynt condition were detected for 0.49 muM Mn2+ (+23.3%, p-value <0.01) and 0.98 muM Mn2+ (+30.9%, p-value <0.001), whereas titer profiles until D14 were comparable (Figure 6c). mAb1 glycosylation results indicate that increasing amounts of manganese led to a significant increase in terminal galactosylation species. Absolute difference for terminal galactosylation level for 0.02, 0.25, and 0.49 muM Mn2+ in comparison to the positive control FCSynt were determined to be 2.6%, 21.4%, and 28.2%, respectively, whereas no further increase in terminal galactosylation was detected for 0.98 muM Mn2+ in comparison to 0.49 muM Mn2+ (Figure 6d). Absolute differences in mAb1 aggregation profile on day 10 for all tested conditions were determined to be less than 0.8% with an average level of HMWs of 3.0% (data not shown). These results demonstrate once more the positive effect that manganese can have on cell performance, but also shows the impact of manganese to significantly increase terminal galactosylation level and thus the necessity to keep manganese levels constant for the production of recombinant proteins.
Effect of high and low manganese-contaminated FC iron sources on further cell lines.
In order to investigate whether other cell lines show differences in cell performance or CQAs for different levels of manganese impurity in iron sources, further small-scale fed-batch experiments were performed with two other CHO cell lines. Therefore, iron deficient Cellvento  4CHO was supplemented with either FCSynt or FCPurch. Additionally, for each iron concentration, a third condition was tested, where manganese was added to FCSynt to match the concentration present in FCPurch containing CCM. For each cell line, two different iron concentrations within the medium were studied.
For cell line 2, a higher maximal VCD was obtained for 10 mg Fe/L FCPurch and FCSynt plus manganese supplementation compared to 10 mg Fe/L FCSynt, whereas for 2 mg Fe/L, only minor changes in cell growth were observed (Figure 7a). Similarly, prolonged viability of cell culture was detected for 10 mg Fe/L FCPurch and FCSynt plus manganese addition in comparison to FCSynt, whereas no difference was detected for 2 mg Fe/L containing conditions (Figure 7b). A difference in titer between the high and low manganese containing conditions was only detected for 10 mg Fe/L, with more than 18% increased final titer in comparison to the low manganese impurity FCSynt (Figure 7c).
For cell line 3, a higher cell growth was observed for FCPurch and FCSynt + Mn2+ compared to FCSynt with an increase in maximal VCD of more than 32% and 9% for 10 and 50 mg Fe/L, respectively (Figure 7d), whereas a prolonged viability upon the presence of manganese was also observed for this cell line independently of the tested iron concentration (Figure 7e). Increased titers for the high manganese conditions in comparison to FCSynt were observed for both tested iron concentrations (Figure 7f). Altogether, these results demonstrate that elevated levels of manganese in CCM led to an increased cell performance for both, cell line 2 and cell line 3.
Study of the glycosylation and aggregation profile of mAb2 produced by cell line 2 and the fusion protein produced by cell line 3 was performed thereafter. Glycosylation analysis was performed by CGE-LIF for mAb2 and UPLC-MS for the fusion protein. For cell line 2 (Figure 8a), usage of FCPurch and FCSynt supplemented with manganese led to a significant increase in terminal galactosylated species of mAb2 in comparison to FCSynt (absolute increase of more than 13%). Usage of FCSynt alone led to a slightly decreased level of terminal galactosylation species for 10 mg Fe/L (9.8%) in comparison to 2 mg Fe/L (14.8%), similarly to the results observed for mAb1. Glycosylation profile of fusion protein produced by cell line 3 (Figure 8b) indicated that a high level of manganese present as contamination in FCPurch increased terminal sialylated species and terminal galactosylated species significantly in comparison to FCSynt, whereas the glycosylation profile of FCPurch was restored upon addition of manganese to FCSynt. Independently of the manganese contamination, an increase in FCSynt concentration from 10 to 50 mg Fe/L led to an absolute decrease in terminal sialylation species of 8.0% and to an absolute increase in terminal galactosylation species of 6.2% suggesting an iron-dependent effect, which is in terms of galactosylation opposite compared to mAb1 and mAb2. Furthermore, since an increase in manganese increased terminal sialylation level but an increase in iron concentration decreased terminal sialylation level, an opposite effect of both elements on sialylation is suggested. For all tested iron concentrations, neither iron, nor manganese demonstrated an impact on aggregation levels (data not shown).
Overall, these results show that manganese and iron have opposite effects on cell performance and protein glycosylation, whereas the effect on mAb2 and fusion protein galactosylation is contrary, demonstrating the need of adding iron and manganese independently of each other to CCM to decouple their effects in cell culture processes.
