Characterization of Monoclonal Antibody Glycan Heterogeneity Using Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry.
Glycosylation is a critical quality attribute of monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapeutics. Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HILIC-MS) is an invaluable technology for the characterization of protein glycosylation. HILIC/MS-based glycan analysis relies on the library search using Glucose Units (GU) and accurate mass (AM) as the primary search parameters for identification. However, GU-based identifications are gradient-dependent and are not suitable for applications where separation gradients need to be optimized to analyze complex samples or achieve higher throughput. Additionally, the workflow requires calibration curves (using dextran ladder) to be generated for each analysis campaign, which in turn, are used to derive the GU values of the separated glycan species. To overcome this limitation, we employed a two-step strategy for targeted glycan analysis of a mAb expressed in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells. The first step is to create a custom library of the glycans of interest independent of GU values (thereby eliminating the need for a calibration curve) and instead uses AM and retention time (RT) as the primary search variables. The second step is to perform targeted glycan screening using the custom-built library. The developed workflow was applied for targeted glycan analysis of a mAb expressed in CHO for 1) cell line selection 2) characterizing the day-wise glycan evolution in a model mAb during a fed-batch culture, 3) assessing the impact of different media conditions on glycosylation, and 4) evaluating the impact of two different process conditions on glycosylation changes in a model mAb grown in a bioreactor. Taken together, the data presented in this study provides insights into the sources of glycan heterogeneity in a model mAb that are seen during its commercial manufacturing.
3 Results.
3.1 Glycan Analysis of VRC01 mAb Using the Standard Method.
The glycan analysis of the VRC01 using the standard library search method resulted in the identification of 53 confirmed N-glycans, out of which 44 were assigned based on both GU values and accurate mass, while the remaining nine glycan species were annotated based on GU values alone (Figure 1). These nine glycan species were low abundance glycans (<2%) and co-eluted with a more abundant glycan species that potentially resulted in suppression of its mass spectrum. Table 1 lists out the identified glycans with their corresponding normalized abundances expressed as the total area of the FLR peak. The relative abundances of these glycans spanned in the range from 0.1% (A2[3]G(4)1S(6)1) to 11.92% (F(6)A2G(4)2S(3,3)2). A total of 18 glycans were base-line resolved, while 35 glycans co-eluted with a more abundant species but were identified and mass-confirmed with this method. Out of the 53 identified glycans, 25 were complex biantennary, 12 were complex triantennary, five were complex tetra antennary, five were high mannose, and six were hybrid glycans. The individual glycan species identified for the VRC01 mAb were grouped into various glycan attributes and are shown in Figure 2. The percentage calculated is the sum of individual normalized amounts (Table 1) for each glycan species contributing to the overall abundance of a given attribute. As it is evident from Figure 2, the majority of glycans are complex biantennary glycans (~57%). High mannose forms also constitute ~13.2% of the overall glycans of VRC01 indicating the presence of immature glycoforms. Of the total identified VRC01 glycans, ~70% of the glycans were galactosylated, ~51% of them were terminally sialylated, and ~68% were core-fucosylated. The higher levels of sialylation observed in VRC01 is an unusual feature generally not observed with mAbs, thereby suggesting it to be an important quality attribute of VRC01. The heavy sialylation level seen in the VRC01 was attributed to glycans occupying the light chain that comprised of heterogenous population of bi-, tri-, and tetraantennary, core fucosylated complex galactosylated and terminally sialylated glycans.
Based on the VRC01 glycan profile using the standard analysis method, 12 glycan species were selected for the monitoring using the glycan screening method (highlighted in Table 1). The selection of these species was made based on the relative % amount, with each of these glycan species present in an amount greater than or equal to 3%. Cumulatively, these 12 glycan species constitute ~65% of overall VRC01 glycans.
3.2 Glycan Screening Method.
The first step in the development of the glycan screening method was to prepare a library of glycan species devoid of GU value information. This step was accomplished by deleting the corresponding GU values of each of the glycan species from the existing waters-commercial glycan library. The Waters commercial glycan library contains GU values of 168 N-linked glycans derived from trastuzumab, infliximab, etanercept, NISTmAb, human serum polyclonal IgG, mouse serum polyclonal IgG, erythropoietin, bovine fetuin, and yeast invertase. The rationale of choosing these glycoproteins for the generation of glycan search library was two-fold: 1) to comprehensively cover the three classes of N-linked glycans namely, high mannose, complex, and hybrid structures; and 2) to provide the extensive coverage of the N-linked glycans that are routinely attached to the therapeutic mAbs and other biopharmaceutical products. Each of these glycans in the commercial library contains information about the corresponding GU values and accurate mass information. The glycan screening library, therefore, is composed of these 168 N-linked glycan species with their only corresponding accurate mass information (Supplementary Table S1). Further, the retention time information of the VRC01 glycan species that are shortlisted for screening was updated to the glycan screening method from the standard run. We note that accurate mass will be used as a primary search variable while the retention time of the glycan species is to be used as a confirmatory variable in the glycan screening method. The retention time information needs to be updated for each separation gradient used for the glycan analysis.
3.3 Comparison of VRC01 Glycosylation From Four Different Clones.
Several clonal CHO cell lines expressing VRC01 mAb were evaluated for the following criterion: the clone should have maximum viable cell densities ranging between 1.0-2.0 x 107 cells/ml and enough volumetric productivity over a standard 14 days fed-batch platform process to ensure that enough material for analysis of N-linked glycans was generated for analysis. Further, the glycan profile should be within a range that allows for any change to be reliably measured in every aspect of the glycosylation profile: galactosylation, fucosylation, sialylation, and high mannose content.
We conducted eight independent fed-batch experiments using the glycan screening method to select one out of the four available clones (two replicates for each clone) for further evaluation. Each of the clones exhibited different volumetric productivities and were developed using a DHFR-based MTX selection system and the detail of their development is provided in a recent publication. The clones, specifically A11, CP24, CP19, and CP 35 demonstrated titers of 1,770, 1,550, 750, and 61 mg/L.
The glycosylation profiles of VRC01 from these clones show large reproducible differences in the levels of sialylation, galactosylation, and fucosylation. As shown in Figure 3, the highest producing clone A11, exhibited maximum relative abundance of the levels of sialylation (~24%), galactosylation (55%), and fucosylation (50%). On the other hand, the lowest producing clone CP35 exhibited the lowest relative abundance of sialylation (10%), galactosylation (35%), and fucosylation (25%). The intermediate producer clones, CP19 and CP24, resulted in relative levels of sialylation, and fucosylation that were less than A11, but higher than CP35. The galactosylation levels in CP24 and CP35 clones were 33.9 +- 1.97 and 36.9 +- 4.36, thereby indicating that the changes are not statistically significant between these 2 cell lines. However, it was found that while the productivity of CP24 cell lines was more than CP19, the levels of the sialylation, galactosylation, and fucosylation were higher in CP19 indicating that the glycosylation levels does not follow a linear relationship with the productivity of the clone. All four clones exhibited different glycan profiles indicating variability in the glycan processing machinery potentially attributed to differential availability of nucleotide sugars, glycan precursors, conformational steric hindrance, and metabolic activity of each clone.
There was no significant difference in the levels of the high mannose glycoforms (M5 forms) in VRC01 from any of the four clones indicating that the structural diversification from the immature high mannose N-glycans into relatively more processed and functionally mature forms consisting of hybrid and complex N- glycans subtypes did take place, regardless of the differences in the productivity of the clones. All clones exhibited similar viable cell density and viability profiles through day 3 before diverging, likely as a result of innate clonal variations. Clone CP35 seemed to diverge the most as it exhibited the highest VCD with nearly 50% greater cell density during exponential growth. This increase in exponential growth for CP35, correlated with greater glucose/nutrient consumption and lactate production which may be associated with apoptosis, leading to a shortened fed-batch culture duration in comparison to the other cell clones. Meanwhile, clone A11 showed slightly greater late culture viability than CP19 and CP24, and A11 had a distinctively lower lactate profile than the other cell clones. Based on these characteristics, the A11 clone was selected for further studies to explore glycosylation dynamics of VRC01 under different culture conditions.
3.4 Day-Wise Evolution of VRC01 Glycans in a Fed-Batch CHO Cell Culture.
The A11 CHO clone was cultivated in a 14 days fed-batch cell culture process, carried out in a 25 ml shake flask. HILIC was used for VRC01 glycan analysis from cell-culture harvest samples collected on different days across exponential growth (days 5, 7, and 8) and the stationary production phase (days 9 and 11). The individual glycan structures were then grouped into major glycosylated species, namely high mannose, galactosylated, sialylated, fucosylated, and afucosylated species.
The FLR traces of the monitored glycans of the VRC01 for the respective days are shown in Figure 4. On day 5, all 12 monitored glycans species were detected and identified, though some were low abundance. With the increasing cell culture duration until day 8, the relative abundance of certain glycan species such as F(6)A2, F(6)A2(6)G(4)1, F(6)A2(3)G(4)1, increased. However, the amounts of F(6)A2G(4)2, F(6)A2G(4)2S(3)1, F(6)A2G(4)2S(3,3)2, A2G(4)2S(3)1 remained relatively constant from day 5 to day 8 (growth phase). From day 8 onwards, the relative abundances of the latter glycan species started decreasing, while the former glycans remained unchanged. The relative abundance of the M5 species remained the same throughout the cell culture period. These data are consistent with a bottleneck in the VRC01 glycosylation that is not in the ability to convert high mannose into low mannose (and followed by the subsequent extension of the glycosylation network in the Golgi), but with steps leading to the transfer of galactosyl and sialyl transfer might be the rate-limiting step in overall glycosylation reaction of the VRC01 in CHO cells. The relatively constant levels of glycoforms such as A2G(4)2S(3)1, F(6) A2G(4)2S(3)1, F(6)A2G(4)2S(3,3)2, and A2G(4)2S(3,6)2 (all of them representing terminally sialylated forms) was observed during the cell culture phase when the viable cell density (VCD) was increasing. However, as the VCD started to decline from day 8 onwards, the relative abundances of the sialylated glycoforms also started decreasing. This decrease in the levels of sialylated glycans at later days of the cell culture (beyond day 8) might be attributed either to the availability of necessary nucleotide sugar donors (NSDs) or the expression levels of the enzymes responsible for the transfer of sialic acid to the growing glycosylation network on the VRC01, or both.
3.5 Comparison of VRC01 Glycosylation Grown in Three Different Media.
The workflow was used for the assessment of the impact of the different cell culture media on the VRC01 glycosylation characteristics. Here, the VRC01 mAb were expressed in a fed-batch CHO culture in both bioreactor and the shake-flask modes of operation in three different media (Media 1, 2, and 3). As shown in Figure 5A, glycans of the VRC01 grown in Media 1 and 2 show similar relative abundances. In contrast, we observed a lower abundance of all glycan species from samples grown in Medium 3 as evidenced by the signal intensity in Figure 5A. The Man 5 species was ~27 and ~52% less in Media 2 and 3, respectively, as compared to that of Medium 1. Similarly, the afucosylated content (mainly from the A2G(4)2 and A2G(4)2S(3,3)2 species) constituted 11.2, 14.9, and 15.6% respectively in Media 1, 2, and 3. Another significant difference in the VRC01 glycosylation that was seen across the three media was in levels of sialylation which exhibited the following trend: sialylation (Medium 3)> sialylation (Medium 2) > sialylation (Medium 1). The increase in sialylation in Media 2 and 3 were attributed to the increase in the relative abundances of following glycan species in Media 2 and 3, respectively as compared that in Medium 1: F(6)A2[6]G(4)1S(6)1 (25.6 and 29.9%), F(6)A2G(4)2S(3)1 (17 and 28.2%), A2G(4)2S(3,3)2 (39.6 and 62%), F(6)A2G(4)2S(3,3)2 (49.2 and 59.3%), F(6)A3G(4)3S(3,3,3)3 (15.3 and 50%), and F(6)A4G(4)4S(3,3,3,3)4 (57 and 56%). Thus, we generally observed a modest increase in the levels of mono-sialylation, and a significant increase in the levels of di-, tri-, and tetra-sialylation of VRC01 glycans in Media 2 and 3, respectively as compared to Medium 1. In addition, consistent with this trend, a modest increase of 12.7 and 21.2% were noted in the levels of galactosylation of VRC01 grown in Media 2 and 3 as compared to Medium 1 (Figure 5B).
The low levels of high mannose glycans along with higher levels of afucosylated glycans seen in Media 2 and 3 as compared to Medium 1 suggests a positive impact of cell culture medium composition on the product quality attribute of VRC01 in the former as compared to the latter. The presence of high mannose glycans in biotherapeutics has been correlated with their rapid clearance in the body resulting in decreased half-life of the molecule. Similarly, a positive correlation between the levels of afucosylated glycans and the antibody-mediated cell cytotoxicity has been established. Recently, a positive correlation in the levels of sialylation and anti-inflammatory activity has also been observed for several mAbs.
3.6 Comparison of VRC01 Glycosylation Grown Under Two Different Process Conditions.
Finally, the glycan profile of VRC01 grown in the Ambr250 bioreactor under two different process conditions was assessed using a glycan screening workflow. The two processes differed from each other in terms of the feedback loop used for DO control over the course of the cell culture (Supplementary Figure S1). The processes are referred to as 2-level DO and 6-level DO, respectively.
As seen in Figure 6, there are substantial differences in the glycosylation profiles of the VRC01 expressed under these two conditions. The 6-level DO process resulted in the presence of greater than ~10-fold higher mannose forms in the VRC01 than the 2-level DO process. This difference is evident from the presence of M5, M7, and M9 forms (peaks 2, 7, 12 in Figure 6A) in the former and was completely absent (except trace levels of M5) in the latter. Even though the overall galactosylation levels of the VRC01 from both processes were similar, several compositional differences of individual glycan forms were also noted between the two processes. For example, while the ratio of peak areas of G1F isoforms (peaks 3 and 4) is 3:1 for the 2-level DO process, it is almost 1:1 for the 6-level DO process. However, the G2F species (peak 6) is significantly higher in abundance in the 6-level DO process than the 2-level DO process, thereby compensating for the decrease in the G1F form. There was no significant change in the sialylated forms (peaks 8, 9,10, and 11), which resulted in a similar level of overall sialylation in the VRC01 from both processes.
Thus, the workflow can highlight the impact of process changes on the observed glycan heterogeneity of mAbs from CHO cell cultures.
