Rapid intensification of an established CHO cell fed-batch process.
Abstract.
Currently, the mammalian biomanufacturing industry explores process intensification (PI) to meet upcoming demands of biotherapeutics while keeping production flexible but, more importantly, as economic as possible. However, intensified processes often require more development time compared with conventional fed-batches (FBs) preventing their implementation. Hence, rapid and efficient, yet straightforward strategies for PI are needed. In this study we demonstrate such a strategy for the intensification of an N-stage FB by implementing N-1 perfusion cell culture and high inoculum cell densities resulting in a robust intensified FB (iFB). Furthermore, we show successful combination of such an iFB with the addition of productivity enhancers, which has not been reported so far. The conventional CHO cell FB process was step-wise improved and intensified rapidly in multi-parallel small-scale bioreactors using N-1 perfusion. The iFBs were performed in 15 and 250 ml bioreactors and allowed to evaluate the impact on key process indicators (KPI): the space-time yield (STY) was successfully doubled from 0.28 to 0.55 g/L d, while product quality was maintained. This gain was generated by initially increasing the inoculation density, thus shrinking process time, and second supplementation with butyric acid (BA), which reduced cell growth and enhanced cell-specific productivity from ~25 to 37 pg/(cell d). Potential impacts of PI on cell metabolism were evaluated using flux balance analysis. Initial metabolic differences between the standard and intensified process were observed but disappeared quickly. This shows that PI can be achieved rapidly for new as well as existing processes without introducing sustained changes in cellular and metabolic behavior.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.
Seed intensification.
For inoculation of the sFB, cells from a conventional N-1 seed were used, that is, batch-wise passaging in shake flasks. For the iFBs, cells from N-1 perfusion cultivation were used. Cell concentrations in perfusion cultivation reached 100 x 106 c/ml within less than 7 days. The respective conventional seeds were split several times not exceeding VCCs of 7 x 106 c/ml (Figure 1). Throughout both approaches, the cells remained viable and in an appropriate state for the inoculation of subsequent N-stages. During the N-1 perfusion processes, the viability decreased slightly towards 95% when used for inoculation. In a previous study we have shown that an apoptotic population was absent and that the inoculum of this culture had no consequences for the N-stage cultivation. The cell diameter grew over time in the N-1 perfusion up to 16 mum while it ranged between 14 and 15 mum for the batch seed.
N stage intensification: 15 ml bioreactors.
The impact of replacing the conventional seed by perfusion was investigated. Both approaches revealed very similar growth profiles with peak VCCs of 20 x 106 c/ml and maintained high final viabilities (Figure 2(a,b)). Still, the seed train mode introduced differentially conditioned cells which is shown by the increased initial cell diameter (Figure 2(c)) of the approach inoculated from N-1 perfusion that decreased quickly within the first 3 days, such that afterwards cells of same size were cultivated. Final IgG titers of about 3.4 g/L and a STY of 0.29 g/L d were obtained (Figure 2(d,e)). Thus, it was concluded that the N-1 mode can be intensified using perfusion, without significantly influencing N-stage performance. Following, the sFBs can be compared against the two iFBs inoculated at 2.5 and 5.0 x 106 c/ml from N-1 perfusion, either. As expected, increasing inoculation cell concentration led to an earlier peak in VCC. As a result, cell viabilities of the intensified processes started to decline earlier, thus, causing faster process terminations after 11 and 8.5 days for the 2.5 and 5 x 106 c/ml approach due to the applied harvest criteria of 70% viability. The observed earlier peak in VCC followed by a decrease in cell viability in iFB set-ups is consistent with results observed by Padawer et al. In contrast to the presented data, Brunner et al. also described a general increase in peak VCC compared to sFBs, but this might be related to an increased feed rate for their iFB, the value of which was not indicated. In our study, the feed regimen was not changed as it proofed to suffice and no nutrients were limited. The cell diameter of the iFBs started to increase again after reaching a minimum of 15 mum. As similar titers were reached in shorter process times (Figure 2(d)), the STY was significantly improved by 16% and 36% for the 2.5 and 5 x 106 c/ml approach, respectively (Figure 2(e)). This first screening experiment showed that the different type of preculture used (batch vs. perfusion) resulted in an initial small difference in cell diameter, which quickly disappeared with N-stage culture time. The STY was increased with process intensification at comparable final titers, peak VCCs and final viabilities which is relevant for process related impurities. Thus, replacement of the N-1 batch by N-1 perfusion in combination with the use of intensified fed-batches is advantageous as it permits the use of less and smaller preculture steps. It was pursued in the subsequent experiment for a more detailed characterization of underlying mechanisms.
Process transfer into 250 ml bioreactor with further improvement.
The most promising approach, that is, inoculation at 5 x 106 c/ml (iFB_5), was transferred to 250 ml bioreactors in order to allow for more frequent and larger sampling to better characterize similarities and differences in metabolism between the intensified process and the sFB using FBA. Additionally, to further improve the intensified process supplementation with the SCFA, butyric acid (BA) was explored. This compound is known to be able to improve the cell-specific productivity and was, therefore supplemented (iFB_5 + BA) at 2.5 mM at day 2.5 (see Figures S1 and S2 for preliminary BA experiments), that is, at the transition from exponential to stationary phase (Figure 3(a)). Both approaches iFB_5 and iFB_5 + BA were compared to the sFB for several KPIs with respect to growth and productivity characteristics.
The sFB, as well as the iFB displayed a similar growth pattern (Figure 3(a,b)), as was also observed in the 15 ml bioreactor, indicating successful process scale-up and good comparability between the two bioreactor systems. Supplementation of 2.5 mM BA at day 2.5 affected the VCC and viability, resulting in early process termination and harvest after 6.5 days.
The moment each of the three processes reached peak VCC, that is, cell growth rate became smaller than the death rate, the cell diameter started to increase. For the iFBs this moment is reached earlier, while BA supplementation additionally amplified this effect (Figure 3(c)). To further study the phenomena, cell cycle analysis was performed (Figure 4). During the exponential phase, the ratios between the different cell cycle phases were comparable between sFB and iFB, except for a slight increase in the G2/M phase in the iFB. This is in accordance with the initially increased average cell diameter of the iFB as cells reach their largest size at the end of G2 phase before dividing into two new daughter cells (M phase). During the stationary phase for all cultures the number of cells in the G1/G0 phase increased similarly as expected. BA supplementation resulted in a slight increase in the G0/G1 population (85%), compared to sFB (82%) and iFB (80%) processes and a decrease in the G2/M population to 3%, in contrast to 7% in the sFB and 5% in the iFB. Although this change is not significant it does agree with literature, where the time an individual cell remains in the G1 phase was reported to be increased by up to 25%, while simultaneously accelerating the apoptosis rate. The fact that the change is small may be related to the fact that the percentage of cells in G1 is already high. This underlines that the time of administration has to be determined critically as done in this study at the end of the exponential phase. The fact that the IgG production increased (Figure 3(d,e)) without a significant increase in G1 implies that BA can increase productivity without affecting the cell cycle. So far, these two observations were reported to occur concurrently and thus this strategy was not explicitly considered to be useful also in the beginning of the stationary phase. However, with respect to STY our data suggest that BA addition can be advantageous even in iFBs. When on average all approaches resulted in similar final product titers of about 3.5 g/L, the STY was improved by 50% with the iFB_5 and even doubled by addition of BA due to a reduction in process duration and, therefore, operation time from 12 (sFB) to 6.5 days (iFB_5 + BA). This is related to the fact, that the cell-specific productivity was significantly increased after BA supplementation (Figure 3(d)) resulting in an average value of 37 pg/c d compared to 23 and 26 pg/c d for the sFB and iFB (Figure 3(e)), respectively. A comparable increase in the cell-specific productivity, accompanied by reduced cell growth and viability upon butyrate treatment, has been reported by others.
These values can be used to estimate the economic benefit of the described process changes for the annual capacity utilization of a 2000 L production bioreactor (Table 1). Next to the aforementioned improvement in STY, shrinking the process duration while keeping the feed regimen equal implicates a reduction in feed media utilization by up to 140 L per run. This is advantageous considering the respectively required production and storage capacities. Thus, in order to harvest similar final volumes in each process, the starting volume can be increased. Ultimately, the doubled STY of iFB_5 + BA results in a potential 70% annual increase of product generated with a single production bioreactor. Of course, such improvement has to be backed up by downstream capabilities. Alternatively, the number of required bioreactor runs to produce a targeted product amount per year can be reduced as described by Stepper et al. allowing to use the 2000 L bioreactor to produce other products, thus making a facility more flexible.
To assess possible differences in product quality, the produced IgG was subjected to N-glycan analysis (Figure 5(a)) and compared with the glycan profile of the sFB. The iFB revealed neglectable small alterations, whereas for the approach treated with BA small, but systematic changes could be detected. While galactosylation (higher G0 and G0F) and fucosylation (lowered G1F', G1F, and G2F) decreased, the mannosylated isoforms increased. These changes might translate into alterations in antibody activity and mode of action. A study investigating the impact of in vitro trimmed mannosylated mAb1 isoforms on its effector functions, showed that while antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) was increased by about 6-fold, complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) was decreased by 50%. Still, the respectively investigated mannosylation ratios were 62%-94%, which is not comparable to the observed significant, but small increase from 1.5% to 4.5% in this study. Yet, even with such low ratios faster clearance of the proportion of a mannosylated mAb compared with its complex and hybrid isoforms were observed within 30 days post injection in humans. Afucosylated isoforms can also improve ADCC as it increases the affinity between IgG1 Fc and FcgammaRIII of immune effector cells. Hong et al. also reported similar results as observed in this study, that is, decreased galactosylation and fucosylation, after BA treatment of mAb producing CHO cells. Still, a mechanistical explanation for the observed impact of carboxylic acid on glycosylation patterns remains elusive. Ultimately, it needs to be considered for every individual biopharmaceutical product if and to which extent changes in the glycosylation profile are acceptable. If process changes are implemented in an existing process it then needs to be decided whether new studies on pharmacokinetic and -dynamics are required.
In contrast to the processes presented here, many similar studies show iFBs that last as long as the respective sFB causing distinct differences in the final viability, that is, below 50%. On the one hand, the last days of such cultivations are not as productive anymore, such that the final STY is impaired. On the other hand, it is very likely that host cell impurities accumulate in the cell culture fluid during the last days of such processes. Nevertheless, even with respect to the respectively shortened process in this study final viabilities of the two iFBs were considerably lower than for the sFB (Figure 3(b)). To determine if these reduced viabilities consequently lead to higher process impurities, HCP and DNA levels were quantified (Figure 5(b)). HCP levels were very comparable between the approaches (410 +- 30 mug/ml) and within the range reported for other FB processes. This is important as long exposure of the product to proteases bears the risk of uncontrollable degradation and product quality loss. In this study, a difference in the final viability of up to 25% was observed between sFB and iFB + BA, but the loss in viability occurred rather fast after BA supplementation, that is, within 4 days, resulting in a reasonably small time period for the accumulation of such proteases. Still, the amount of extracellular DNA almost doubled, but this, however, should be within feasible boundaries considering DNA to be removed by multiple log-stages within the first downstream unit operations, especially protein A capture and anion exchange chromatography.
In conclusion, the most favorable iFB identified in the Ambr 15 to be inoculated at 5 x 106 c/ml was successfully transferred into the Ambr 250 with very similar process performance. Additionally, supplementation of BA in this iFB proofed to be an efficient modification for process intensification by reducing the process duration while maintaining product quantity and quality, thus, significantly increasing the STY. If these processes, for example, through the observed small changes in the glycan profile, are disadvantageous in terms of product quality still remains to be further examined and finally accessed via functional assays (e.g., binding affinities, target specificity, mode of action, or stability/half-life in vivo). With respect to the presented data, impact on downstream product purification should be considerably low, but this needs to be confirmed in further studies as well.
Nutrient profiles of intensified fed-batches.
In order to characterize the impact of process intensification on a metabolic level, nutrients and metabolites were measured extracellularly during the process. An overview of the concentrations of all measured components can be found in the Table S5. The concentrations of key nutrients glucose and glutamine, as well as byproducts lactate and ammonia, are depicted in Figure 6. Applying the standard feeding scheme with FMA and FMB for the iFBs, but earlier in time (feed start after 12 h compared to day 3 for the sFB), efficiently maintained glucose levels within the boundaries of the sFB except for day 2.5, after which the first glucose feed was applied. Feeding was started as soon as the glutamine concentration fell below 0.5 mM, that is, after 0.5 days for the iFBs and day 3 for the sFB. Subsequently, glutamine concentrations remained low as it was not contained in the feed. Lactate peak concentration was found to be doubled (20 mM) for the sFB compared with iFB (<10 mM) before feed onset. Afterwards, it was consumed and stayed below 5 mM for all processes. After a local maximum after feed start, ammonia was consumed temporarily before it accumulated to about 10 mM after the stationary phase towards the end of each process. Earlier accumulation of such inhibiting substances, like lactate and ammonia, in iFBs compared to conventional processes was reported before, for example, by Padawer et al. The osmolality (data not shown) started for all approaches at 315 +- 5 mOsmol/kg and increased until the process end towards about 360 mOsmol/kg, such that no differentiating impact of these values is expected.
Metabolic rates.
In order to characterize metabolic differences, thus, derive potential individual cellular requirements, between the approaches, metabolic exchange rates were calculated for the exponential and stationary phase (see blue and yellow circled points in Figure 3), respectively. In the exponential phase (Figure 7(a)), the cells of the iFB were initially consuming twice as much glucose as the cells of the sFB which distinctly indicates an elevated energy demand and points towards a substantially enhanced glycolytic flux. At the same time, there was hardly any lactate uptake, but ammonium consumption was increased for the iFB. In parallel, IgG productivity was increased for the iFB_5 (0.35 pmol/c d) compared with the sFB (0.29 pmol/c d). In contrast, during the stationary phase (Figure 7(b)), all metabolic rates converged. Both lactate and ammonia were neither produced nor consumed in this phase for both approaches. IgG productivity was found to be identical at 0.29 pmol/c d for the sFB and iFB_5, but BA supplementation caused an increase in cell specific productivity to 0.35 pmol/c d. Still, the growth rate of the sFB was slightly higher at this point in the stationary phase which is in accordance with other studies, also reporting sustained differences in growth characteristic during the stationary phase (P4 in Brunner et al.).
In order to compile all rates of the approaches, oversee their incorporated variations and compare them between each other, PCA was conducted (Figure 8). It indicates clusters of the respective triplicates at different points during the processes, where the first two principal components cover already 76% of the total variation. While clear differences can be observed at the beginning of the exponential phase (iFB_5: d1.5; sFB: d4), the observations converged subsequently, resulting in two joint clusters S1 and S2 for the stationary phase, irrespectively, of the seed source or inoculation concentration. Moreover, BA supplementation caused the respective cultures to be separated from S2 early on. Stepper et al. recently reported similar results within PCA of gene expression data for a standard (inoculated at 0.7 x 106 c/ml) and two intensified FBs (inoculated at 10 x 106 c/ml) where phase-specific clusters formed but progression throughout them was accelerated for the intensified processes. Yet, they only used N-1 perfusion to inoculate the processes, such that the influence of this stage on the transcriptome profile and its progression in the N-stage cannot be evaluated as done in this study.
Metabolic characterization using FBA and FVA.
Based on the metabolic rates, geometric FBA was used to further explore metabolic differences and similarities between the sFB and iFB in their exponential and stationary phase. FVA identifies the minimum and maximum range of each reaction flux that still satisfies the constraints. It was used to identify overlapping fluxes between the approaches which means these fluxes cannot be identified as being different (Figure 9, Tables S3 and S4). Applying a chi2-test, it was verified that the nitrogen balances closed in the exponential phase. For the stationary phase, the nitrogen balance did not close for all three approaches. This was attributed to a systematic error in determining the specific growth rate, which in turn is due to difficulties in calculating the specific death rate due to more pronounced cell lysis in the stationary phase. For the sFB and iFB_5, only a small correction of the specific growth rate was required to close the nitrogen balance (Figure 7(c)), while for the iFB_5 + BA a large correction would have been needed. Thus, we decided to use the nitrogen balance to calculate the specific growth rate for the sFB and iFB_5 and to not include the iFB_5 + BA in the comparison using FBA. In general, the fluxes of glycolysis, TCA and PPP were identified to overlap in both phases between standard and intensified FB, therefore, they cannot be differentiated based on FVA.
In the exponential phase (Figure 9(a)), 88 out of 196 fluxes were found to be different between the iFB_5 and sFB. The calculated fluxes showed that twice as much ATP was produced in the iFB_5 and, related to this, that the oxidative phosphorylation reaction fluxes of NADH and FADH2 and the calculated oxygen consumption were doubled. This finding can be of relevance for subsequent scale-up to production scale with respect to bioreactor design, k La and DO control. In this case, oxygen in the gas outlet was not measured, such that the calculated specific oxygen uptake rates of the FBA model cannot be verified with experimental data. Still, with the given bioreactor design and DO control strategy, cells were sparged with a constant air flow and varying proportions of oxygen added flow as needed. However, the k La is not exactly known which is why the oxygen transfer and, related with that, the oxygen uptake rate cannot be precisely calculated. Since identical bioreactors were used and operated at the same stirring speed and working volume also the k La will be comparable and the oxygen flow is representative for the specific oxygen uptake rate at comparable cell densities. This oxygen flow was at about 0.02 vvm for the sFB and at 0.036 vvm for the iFB, confirming the increased oxygen uptake rate of the cells in the iFB. The main sources to cover the increased demand of required reduction equivalents NADH are either glycolysis and TCA or the PPP with subsequent transhydrogenation of NADPH. Based on FVA, it cannot be distinctly assigned which of these pathways is responsible for the increased NADH generation in the iFB_5. However, most likely the NADH production is covered by glycolysis and the citric acid cycle and these pathways are also responsible for the increase in NADH production in the iFB_5. This in accordance with the observation, that the energy demand of highly proliferating CHO cells in the exponential phase is mainly covered by the TCA cycle indicated by an increased activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). Further studies exemplified that glucose carbon is predominantly shuttled via glycolysis rather than PPP during the exponential phase, for example, shown by Carinhas et al. with less than 10% being diverted into latter one. Also, the higher specific production rate of the byproducts lactate and alanine in the iFB_5 indicates a higher glycolytic flux at this point as already observed with the calculated lactate rate in Figure 7. In the sFB, however, the metabolic switch from lactate production to consumption already occurred and byproduct formation had stopped at this point. To a certain extent, the different ratios in glucose uptake will simply rely on the difference in cell size (Figure 3(c)). Considering this, it is obvious that cell duplication of larger cells then requires more biomass precursors, for example, lipids that are composed of fatty acids. Their synthesis requires NADPH, that is generated via anaplerotic catalyzation of malate to pyruvate (iFB_5: 2.11 pmol/c d vs. sFB: 1.17 pmol/c d). Pyruvate is then finally converted into lactate in the cytosol and this might explain why at a comparable process phase, that is, in the exponential phase, still lactate production is found for the iFB_5. Similarly, a fraction of the increased amount of ATP is used in the enhanced production of biomass precursors, especially cellular protein, required to meet demands for the slightly higher biomass formation rates. Although the specific growth rates were similar between processes the cells in the iFB were a bit larger resulting in slightly higher biomass formation rates. Accordingly, the fluxes related to the formation of protein, fatty acids, carbohydrates, and nucleotides were different between iFB_5 and sFB. Furthermore, the specific productivity was slightly higher in the iFB also requiring a bit of extra ATP. However, both the increase in biomass formation and in productivity seem not high enough to explain the increase in ATP formation. In contrast to this study's observations, Brunner et al. reported an increased metabolic activity in the exponential phase (P1) for the sFB characterized by an elevated ATP production and glucose demand compared with their respective iFB inoculated at 5 x 106 c/ml. The difference to the aforementioned study is, that N-1 perfusion was used to inoculate both sFB and iFB_5, while in this study conventional N-1 and N-1 perfusion was used for the sFB and iFB_5, respectively.
In the stationary phase (Figure 9(b)), only 54 fluxes remained different based on FVA indicating that the metabolic states of the cells in both sFB and iFB_5 converge with progressing cultivation time. Also, the remaining different fluxes only had very small differences and were almost overlapping. The byproduct formation almost stopped and the fluxes of the main pathways glycolysis, TCA and PPP were very similar between sFB and iFB_5.
Remarkably, the flux changes from exponential to stationary phase were larger for the iFB_5, where the total metabolic turnover was decreased. In contrast, fluxes for the sFB increased generally slightly from the exponential to stationary phase. Here, the ATP generation was increased by 35%. While during the stationary phase about 16% of the total produced protein was IgG for both sFB and iFB_5, this ratio increased to about 50% in the exponential phase demonstrating efficient and similar product synthesis in both approaches. Concluding, the identified and characterized metabolic differences mainly rely on the initial difference in cell size, that fades out with time, but the flux ratios between the sFB and iFB_5 correlate. Recognizing this strengthens the implementation of an iFB with the proposed strategy to be straightforward and robust.
