Loss of a newly discovered microRNA in Chinese hamster ovary cells leads to upregulation of N-glycolylneuraminic acid sialylation on monoclonal antibodies.
Abstract.
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are known not to express appreciable levels of the sialic acid residue N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) on monoclonal antibodies. However, we actually have identified a recombinant CHO cell line expressing an IgG with unusually high levels of NGNA sialylation (>30%). Comprehensive multi-OMICs based experimental analyses unraveled the root cause of this atypical sialylation: (1) expression of the cytidine monophosphate-N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase (CMAH) gene was spontaneously switched on, (2) CMAH mRNA showed an anti-correlated expression to the newly discovered Cricetulus griseus (cgr) specific microRNA cgr-miR-111 and exhibits two putative miR-111 binding sites, (3) miR-111 expression depends on the transcription of its host gene SDK1, and (4) a single point mutation within the promoter region of the sidekick cell adhesion molecule 1 (SDK1) gene generated a binding site for the transcriptional repressor histone H4 transcription factor HINF-P. The resulting transcriptional repression of SDK1 led to a downregulation of its co-expressed miR-111 and hence to a spontaneous upregulation of CMAH expression finally increasing NGNA protein sialylation.
Fischer and co-workers identified a mAb producing CHO cell line exhibiting unusually high levels of potentially immunogenic NGNA sialylation. A comprehensive multi-OMICS based root cause analysis revealed that the CMAH gene was upregulated as a result of a point mutation identified in the promoter region of the SDK1 gene which led to the silencing of its intronic miR-111. MiR-111 has been discovered as a new regulatory RNA in CHO cells responsible for CMAH gene and thus sialylation regulation.
RESULTS.
Differential gene expression reveals CMAH to be causative for enhanced NGNA sialylation.
Over the course of a routine CLD process to generate a recombinant mAb producing CHO cell line, one of the established stable cell lines (Clone B) was identified to express the desired IgG4 antibody with unusually high levels of terminal NGNA sialic acid. To systematically investigate this atypical glycosylation pattern, we initiated a comparative analysis of Clone B with one of its sister clones (Clone A), which was derived from the same CLD campaign but exhibited only trace levels of NGNA sialylation on the recombinantly expressed IgG4 antibody. Both clonal cell lines were cultivated in a controlled fed-batch cultivation process using 2L bioreactors and demonstrated a similar growth behavior in the first half of the cultivation process, which changed from Day 6 onward (Figure 1a,b). Secreted antibodies were purified via Protein A chromatography followed by sialylation analysis of the purified mAbs (Figure 1c). On the day of the bioreactor harvest NANA sialylation levels seemed comparable between Clones A and B. However, mAbs produced by Clone B showed nearly 10-fold increased NGNA sialylation at an absolute amount of ~35% of the secreted antibodies.
To identify the root cause of the phenotypic difference between Clones A and B, genome, transcriptome and miRnome data were generated using Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). For these analyses, 31 samples were taken from the fed-batch cultivations on Days 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 (Day 11 only for Clone B due to a low cell viability of <60% for Clone A) and used for preparation of RNASeq and miRNASeq libraries including biological replicates. Global variance in transcriptome data was visualized in a principal component analysis (PCA) (Figure 2a). Gene expression profiles were found to depend on the factors "Clone" and "Time." Importantly, the factors seemed to be unrelated which was corroborated by a GLM for count data with factor "clone" and co-factor "day" (data not shown). To identify differentially expressed genes, the time-resolved gene-level count tables were analyzed with DESeq. 2 for the factor clone (Figure 2b). One thousand nine hundred and ninety genes were differentially expressed between the two clones considering a fold change of >1.5 and a BHQ value of <0.0001 (1053 upregulated in Clone B and 937 genes upregulated in Clone A). These included CMAH, which is known to convert CMP-NANA to the nonhuman and potentially immunogenic sialic acid precursor CMP-NGNA in the cytosol (Ghaderi et al., ; Y. Li & Chen, ). Interestingly, CMAH showed a strong regulation between Clones A and B (Fold factor 8.9) and thus a relevant absolute expression of 12,441 raw read counts in Clone B.
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing tools were used to investigate whether the CMAH protein was responsible for increased protein NGNA sialylation by modification of the genomic CMAH gene locus to produce a catalytically inactive variant. Generated clonal cell lines were subsequently investigated for global surface glycoprotein NGNA sialylation (Figure 2c). In contrast to the controls, Clone B derived cell lines with confirmed genomic modifications of CMAH displayed no surface glycoprotein NGNA sialylation anymore. In addition, compared to the controls the CMAH knockout clones had entirely lost the NGNA sialylation on the secreted IgG4 antibody (Figure 2d). This indicated that the catalytic activity of the CMAH protein was solely required for the upregulated NGNA protein sialylation and thus represented the causative effector protein for NGNA sialylation in Clone B. However, based on whole genome re-sequencing data generated for both cell lines, we found neither copy number variations nor mutations for any of the two time points for Clone B relative to Clone A (data not shown). Therefore, we concluded that changes in CMAH levels between the two cell lines could not be explained by mutations in the coding region, promoter or 3'-UTR of the CMAH gene itself or by a gene amplification event. We completed the analysis of the CMAH gene promoter region by bisulfite sequencing experiments that did not show differential DNA methylation either (data not shown).
Newly identified miR-111 regulates the expression of CMAH.
To investigate the regulation of CMAH gene expression, miRNASeq libraries were generated and mapped against Clone_A_D1 using miRDeep* (mapping efficiency of 2.3%, 1.15 million mapped read), resulting in 605 de novo predicted miRNAs quantified as raw read counts (Zit miRDeep*) (An et al., ). The variance in microRNAome data was visualized in a PCA (Figure 3a). Seven miRNAs were detected to be significantly differentially expressed considering a fold change of >1.5 and a BHQ value of <0.0001 (Figure 3b). Here, the miRNA with the strongest regulation was miR-111 (fold factor 0.0297 Clone B vs. Clone A), which was further verified using qRT-PCR analysis (Figure S1). Interestingly, analysis of the cell line-specific genomes showed that miR-111 is located in the first intron of the SDK1 gene, which was also amongst the most significantly regulated genes found between Clones A and B (fold factor 0.0077 Clone B vs. Clone A). Corroborating the hypothesis that miR-111 might be regulated via the SDK1 gene promoter, the significantly differentially expressed genes were analyzed for correlation with miR-111 expression. Strikingly, SDK1 showed the strongest correlation (R-value = 0.96, Figure 3c).
Assuming that miR-111 played a key role in establishing the observed glycosylation phenotype of Clone B, we searched for potential miR-111 targets in the CHO cell transcriptome. In total, 665 miR-111 anti-correlated transcripts with R-values < -0.75 resulted from this analysis (Figure 4a). These transcripts were further investigated with respect to functional annotation (metabolic pathways, Pfam motifs and GO:biological process annotation). Twenty-seven miR-111 anti-correlated genes showed functional annotation indicating a role in protein glycosylation (Table 1). Among the investigated metabolic pathways, "N-glycan biosynthesis" was the pathway showing the highest over-representation with a Fisher's Exact test p-value < 0.01. Four genes were directly associated with the N-glycan biosynthesis pathway. To analyze whether the miR-111 anti-correlated genes were potentially directly regulated by miR-111, we conducted a genome-wide in silico target site prediction and found miR-111 target sites in the 3'-UTRs of 6,732 genes. The 665 miR-111 anti-correlated genes showed a significant over-representation (236 genes with target site predictions, Fisher's exact test p-value < 0.005). Strikingly, CMAH was identified to exhibit two putative miR-111 binding sites in its 3'UTR region (Figure 4b). One of them had the optimal predicted target sequence aACAAGAa. Moreover, CMAH and miR-111 expression were significantly anti-correlated (R-value = -0.88, Figure 4c). To investigate whether miR-111 directly regulates CMAH expression, we transiently transfected Clone B with miR-111 mimics and found CMAH mRNA to be downregulated in comparison to the nontargeting control (Figure 4d). In line with the decreased CMAH mRNA expression also the NGNA sialylation of the secreted IgG4 antibody was reduced following transient transfection of miR-111 mimics (Figure 4e). Thus, we concluded that CMAH is most likely negatively regulated by miR-111 in CHO cells.
Investigation of the miR-111/SDK1 sequence and DNA locus discovers a critical sequence variation.
The nearly palindromic miR-111 precursor sequence predicted by miRDeep* exhibits a very stable 2-D structure (-55 kcal/mol, Figure 5a). The miRDeep* predicted mature miR-111 sequence (aTCTTGTtccctctttggtac) has a TargetScan predicted optimal target sequence of aACAAGAa. We verified that the exclusive presence of miR-111 in the CHO cell/Chinese hamster (Cricetulus griseus) genome was not previously reported by blasting both the precursor as well as the mature miR-111 sequence against the mirBase (using blastn-short, data not shown). After verification of miR-111 as a true Chinese hamster (cgr)-specific miRNA, we sought to pinpoint the reason for differential SDK1 regulation leading to the expression of miR-111 and finally the changes in mAb sialylation. For this purpose, a detailed analysis of the SDK1 gene locus was conducted (Figure 5b). MiR-111 is located in the first intron of SDK1. Both SDK1 and miR-111 are positioned on the DNA minus strand. No mutations were identified within the first SDK1 intron (Figure 5c). Postulating that SDK1 is the host gene of miR-111 and thus miR-111 expression is controlled by the SDK1 gene promoter, we investigated the SDK1 gene promoter region for sequence variants between Clones A and B and indeed found a single point mutation (Figure 5d). Consequently, we performed a prediction of transcription factor binding sites in the SDK1 promoter region (-5000 bp to +500 bp relative to the transcription start site) of both clones. A binding site of the zinc finger repressor protein growth factor independent-1 (Gfi-1) was predicted in the promoter of Clone A (2394-2403 bases upstream of the SDK1 transcription start site, ident score = 0.709, p-value < 0.0001). Due to a point mutation within exactly this binding site in Clone B (540549ptT > G), the Gfi-1 binding site was predicted to be changed into a binding site of another repressor:HINF-P:(2395-2404 bases upstream of the SDK1 transcription start site, ident score = 0.843, p-value < 0.0001) (Figure 5e). Interestingly, looking at the transcriptomic data of both clones HINF-P shows a much higher overall mRNA expression than Gfi-1 (27,988 vs. 324 overall raw read counts, respectively) indicating that Gfi-1 might not be expressed at all in CHO cells. Finally, CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genomic deletion of either the newly generated putative HINF-P TF binding site or the HINF-P transcription factor gene both led to a significant decrease in NGNA sialylation of surface glycoproteins in Clone B (Figure S2). Thus, the identified single point mutation (540549ptT > G) in the SDK1 gene promoter very likely represents the root cause of changes in miR-111 expression as well as its downstream gene targets between Clones A and B leading to the altered protein sialylation.
