Use of a small molecule cell cycle inhibitor to control cell growth and improve specific productivity and product quality of recombinant proteins in CHO cell cultures.
The continued need to improve therapeutic recombinant protein productivity has led to ongoing assessment of appropriate strategies in the biopharmaceutical industry to establish robust processes with optimized critical variables, that is, viable cell density (VCD) and specific productivity (product per cell, qP). Even though high VCD is a positive factor for titer, uncontrolled proliferation beyond a certain cell mass is also undesirable. To enable efficient process development to achieve consistent and predictable growth arrest while maintaining VCD, as well as improving qP, without negative impacts on product quality from clone to clone, we identified an approach that directly targets the cell cycle G1-checkpoint by selectively inhibiting the function of cyclin dependent kinases (CDK) 4/6 with a small molecule compound. Results from studies on multiple recombinant Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines demonstrate that the selective inhibitor can mediate a complete and sustained G0/G1 arrest without impacting G2/M phase. Cell proliferation is consistently and rapidly controlled in all recombinant cell lines at one concentration of this inhibitor throughout the production processes with specific productivities increased up to 110 pg/cell/day. Additionally, the product quality attributes of the mAb, with regard to high molecular weight (HMW) and glycan profile, are not negatively impacted. In fact, high mannose is decreased after treatment, which is in contrast to other established growth control methods such as reducing culture temperature. Microarray analysis showed major differences in expression of regulatory genes of the glycosylation and cell cycle signaling pathways between these different growth control methods. Overall, our observations showed that cell cycle arrest by directly targeting CDK4/6 using selective inhibitor compound can be utilized consistently and rapidly to optimize process parameters, such as cell growth, qP, and glycosylation profile in recombinant antibody production cultures.
Results.
Complete and Sustained Cell Cycle G1 Arrest Using a Selective CDK4/6 Small Molecule Inhibitor.
To induce a complete and selective cell cycle G0/G1 arrest without potentiating other cellular pathways, we used a small molecule cell cycle inhibitor (CCI) to selectively inhibit the kinase activity of CDK4/6 (Fig. 1A). While potently inhibiting CDK4/6, the compound was highly selective showing little activity when screened at 1 muM compound concentration against the vast majority of >440 other kinases, including CDK2, CDK3, CDK5, and multiple cyclin-dependent kinase-like (CDKL) kinases, confirming and expanding previous reports (; Fry et al.,) (data not shown). In addition, the inhibitory effect of CCI on different selected kinases, including CDK4/6, was tested over a large concentration range (0.001-10 microM) of CCI in the kinase assays to obtain IC50 values. The results demonstrate the potency and selectivity of CCI against CDK4/6 compared to inhibition against various other kinases (Table 1995). The specific inhibitory effect on Rb phosphorylation was further confirmed from by Western blotting (Fig. 1B). Both ERK and S6 kinase signaling networks are involved in cell proliferation and protein expression. As shown in Figure 1B, phosphorylation of ERK and S6 kinases were not affected, suggesting that the CCI has no effect on these two signaling pathways. To test its effect on recombinant CHO cell growth, different dosages of the compound were added to the cultures of two different mAb-expressing cell lines at day 0 with seeding density at 0.5 x 105 c/mL, while VCD and viability were measured daily for 5 days. Compared to the control, in which cell growth reached 3-5 million cells per mL, cell growth after CCI treatment was significantly inhibited, and the maximum effect on growth arrest was attained between 5-10microM at 24 h of treatment (Fig. 2A and B). Despite the growth arrest, no significant cytotoxicity was observed at these concentrations (5-10 microM) of the compound as deduced from ending viabilities compared to the control (Fig. 2C and D) for both cell lines. Similar results were observed with an additional 10 different Amgen recombinant cell lines with different productivity, growth rate and product quality profiles using the same dosages of CCI, suggesting a broad treatment effect (data not shown).
A selective Cdk4/6 inhibitor should cause a specific accumulation of cells in G1 but has no effect on other phases of the cell cycle in which cells should continue to progress and eventually decline in number. Indeed, cell cycle profiling indicated that 96% of the CCI-treated cells were arrested in G0/G1, compared to 49.8% of control cells at 24 h (Fig. 3A and B). S phase was diminished at 24 h post treatment, with a concomitant decline in G2/M phase of the cell cycle (Fig. 3B). The cell cycle inhibitory effect was sustained for at least 4 days without further addition (Fig. 3E). In comparison, Asn limitation and reducing culture temperature are less effective in G0/G1 arrest (Fig. 3C and D). Taken together, these data indicate that selectively blocking CDK4/6 activity can induce a maximum level of G0/G1 enrichment and growth arrest within 24 h without causing cell death with the same dosage for all recombinant CHO cells tested.
The Selective CDK4/6 Inhibitor Has Consistent Effect on Increasing Specific Productivity With Multiple Recombinant CHO Cell Lines.
We then assessed whether the specific and complete cell cycle G0/G1 arrest observed also increases specific productivity (qP). As shown in Figure 4, a recombinant mAb-expressing CHO cell line was treated with the inhibitor using a plate-based production format, which includes complete daily medium-exchange. In this way, the cells were continuously exposed to the indicated level of CCI, which was supplied with daily medium exchange. The control cells grew continuously for 4 days from 1 x 107/mL to 2.8 x 107/mL in production medium, whereas addition of CCI compound arrested cell growth and maintained VCD under 1.4 x 107/mL at day 4 (Fig. 4A). Cell viabilities remained above 80% throughout the 5-day production with the treatment of 5-10 microM of CCI (Fig. 4B), which is consistent with our previous subculture results (Fig. 2B and D). The qP from CCI treatment was increased more than two fold (Fig. 4C). In addition, CCI treatment showed no impact on mAb aggregation, one of PQA shown by HMW species (Fig. 4D). Similar results had been observed with a panel of recombinant CHO cell lines expressing different recombinant antibodies, using the same concentration of CCI (10 microM) (Table 2006). All cell lines can be arrested in cell growth and qP consistently increased between 2 and 3 fold with the same dosage of CCI. For the high producing cell line (cell line A), the qP reached 110 pg/cell/day (Table 2006). Taken together, these results confirmed that CDK4/6 inhibitor is able to control cell growth even at a high cell density (seeding density at 1 x 107/mL at day 0). The effect is rapid (within 24 h) and sustained for at least 5 days. Most importantly, the data indicate that a complete and exclusive G0/G1 arrest is sufficient to consistently increase qP more than two fold in all CHO cell lines regardless of their basal qP, suggesting the potential for broad application of this small molecule additive to various cell culture processes.
The Effects of a Complete G0/G1 Arrest on N-Linked Glycosylation Maturation.
We next investigated the impact of a sustained G0/G1 arrest on N-linked glycosylation of mAb. As with productivity, PQA, in particular, mAb glycosylation profiles have become more important due to the increasing need to demonstrate product quality comparability with both commercial products comparability and biosimilar initiatives. Since G0/G1 arrest is linked to cell differentiation, it is reasonable to hypothesize that related cellular pathways, such as the secretion pathway, are highly activated, which will affect not only protein expression but also glycosylation. As shown in Figure 4E, CCI treatment during production decreased high mannose level (Man5) suggesting G0/G1 arrest might improve glycan processing. To further investigate this effect, multiple recombinant cell lines which produce mAbs with different glycan profiles were selected and tested for glycan profile with and without CCI treatment. The result showed that all high mannose glycans were significantly decreased for all tested mAbs compared to the control (Fig. 5A). Meanwhile, the fraction of complex glycans that are core fucosylated and terminally galactosylated (G1F and G2F) were increased after CCI treatment (Fig. 5B). The optimal dosage of CCI in these glycan changes appeared to be slightly different from clone to clone between 5 and 10 microM (Fig. 5A and B). The impact of CCI treatment on glycan structures and distribution are shown in Figure 5C. Results showed decreases in the levels of a variety of HM glycans (M5, M6, M7, and M8) and the hybrid structures containing HM (G0FM5, G1FM5, G0M5), suggesting improved processing of high mannose structures (Fig. 5C). This was accompanied by increases in the levels of fucosylated and galactosylated bi-antennary glycan structures (G1F and G2F), the two major mature complex structures (Fig. 5C). Core fucosylation reactions are efficient in the tested cell lines, therefore unfucosylated bi-antennary structures, such as G0 and G1, were low (<4%), and G2 was not detected (Fig. 5C). In addition, the levels of these minor glycan structures, such as G1, together with the major ungalactosylated glycan structure, G0F, were decreased after CCI treatment (Fig. 5C). Since these structures are intermediates in the pathway to synthesis of G1F and G2F structures, the decrease likely reflects the maturation of G1 to G1F by addition of core fucose, and the maturation of G0F to G1F by addition of galactose. Similar changes in glycan distribution were found in products from other recombinant clones (data not shown). Taken together, these data suggest that the efficiency of N-linked glycan processing is different with CCI treatment.
Comparison of Different Growth Arrest Methods on Cell Performance and Product Quality in Bioreactor Productions.
As mentioned earlier, decreasing culture temperature and nutrient-limitation are the two major methods that have been used to control cell growth and also improve qP during perfused bioreactor production processes. Here we compared the similarity and the difference between these approaches with CDK4/6 inhibitor treatment. Recombinant cells were seeded below 1 x 106/mL. When VCD reached approximately 4 x 107/mL (day 8), the bioreactors were treated either by CCI compound addition or a culture temperature shift from 36 C to 30 C (TS). For the nutrient-limiting condition, low Asn (5 mM) medium was used since this method has been effective in our hands for many cell lines. As shown in Figure 6, cells from the control bioreactor reached 1.2 x 108/mL at day 15. On the other hand, cell growth is well controlled by CCI treatment and a 30 C-temperature shift (<7 x 107/mL) without causing cell death (Fig. 6A and B). Both approaches increased qP from 20 to 40-45 pg/cell/day at day 15 (Fig. 6C). Low Asn had a similar but less pronounced effect on both growth control and qP (Fig. 6A and C). With increased qP, the production titers were therefore not impacted compared to control, even though VCDs were decreased in CCI, temperature shift and low Asn conditions (Fig. 6D). Differences were found in mAb PQA between these methods. Antibody produced from 30 C-temperature shift condition showed an obvious decrease in HMW compared to control, suggesting lower cultivation temperature may improve mAb assembly (Fig. 6E). However, decreasing the culture temperature to 30 C induced an increase of mAb HM level, with a concomitant decrease in the level of bi-antennary galatosylated glycans (G1F and G2F) (Fig. 6F and G). In comparison, CCI-treatment reduced HM and increased G1F/G2F levels (Fig. 6E and F), which are consistent with the 24-DWP production assay for this cell line (Figs. 4E and 5B, cell line D).
To determine if the phenotypic changes observed in production reactors and product quality correlated with changes in gene expression, DNA microarray analysis was performed. The analysis showed that the mRNA levels of many enzymes and transporters involved in the N-linked glycosylation pathway were significantly decreased in the temperature shift condition but increased in CCI-treated cells (Fig. 7). These genes are key processing enzymes in glycan trimming and maturation, including GlcNAc beta 1,4 (1,3)-galactosyltransferase (B3galt, B4galt), beta-galactosidealpha-2,3-sialyltransferase 1 (St3gal), UDP-galactose transporter (Slc35a2), mannoside acetylglucosaminyltransferase 1(Mgat1), UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:polypeptide-N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase (B3galnt), and fucosyltransferase 8 (Fut8) (Fig. 7). Genes that are involved in glyco-protein quality control, such as calnexin, were also downregulated in mRNA levels in the temperature shift condition (Fig. 7). Epigenetic suppressors, such as Sirtuin 1, were upregulated in the temperature shift condition, providing a possible link between metabolism homeostasis and modulation of glycosylation pathway genes. The expression profiles of genes involved in the cell cycle pathway were also compared. Interestingly, CKIs, such as p21 (Cdkn1a) and p27 (Cdkn1b), were significantly upregulated with temperature shift, at 24 h, but not as the result of CCI treatment (Fig. 8), suggesting that CKIs are involved in temperature shift-, but not CCI-, mediated cellular effects. The low Asn condition induced fewer changes in the cell cycle pathway compared to CCI or temperature shift with the exception of a slight increase in p15 (Cdkn2b) expression but not other CKIs, suggesting a different growth arrest mechanism. The result from CCI-treatment is consistent with previous studies (; Fry et al.,) since all E2F target genes, which include CKIs, CDK2, CCNA, CCNB, and CCNE, are all down-regulated, due to deactivation of CDK4/6 function (Fig. 8). Thus, the CCI-mediated G0/G1 arrest is different from CKI-dependent approaches, which could partly explain the difference in phenotypes. Taken together these data support a model in which a selective and complete cell cycle G0/G1 arrest, mediated by directly blocking CDK4/6 functions, can both inhibit cell proliferation and simultaneously induce a program that favors recombinant protein secretion, assembly and glycosylation modification.
