Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) Host Cell Engineering to Increase Sialylation of Recombinant Therapeutic Proteins by Modulating Sialyltransferase Expression.
N-Glycans of human proteins possess both alpha2,6- and alpha2,3-linked terminal sialic acid (SA). Recombinant glycoproteins produced in Chinese hamster overy (CHO) only have alpha2,3-linkage due to the absence of alpha2,6-sialyltransferase (St6gal1) expression. The Chinese hamster ST6GAL1 was successfully overexpressed using a plasmid expression vector in three recombinant immunoglobulin G (IgG)-producing CHO cell lines. The stably transfected cell lines were enriched for ST6GAL1 overexpression using FITC-Sambucus nigra (SNA) lectin that preferentially binds alpha2,6-linked SA. The presence of alpha2,6-linked SA was confirmed using a novel LTQ Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry (LTQ MS) method including MSn fragmentation in the enriched ST6GAL1 Clone 27. Furthermore, the total SA (mol/mol) in IgG produced by the enriched ST6GAL1 Clone 27 increased by 2-fold compared to the control. For host cell engineering, the CHOZN  GS host cell line was transfected and enriched for ST6GAL1 overexpression. Single-cell clones were derived from the enriched population and selected based on FITC-SNA staining and St6gal1 expression. Two clones ("ST6GAL1 OE Clone 31 and 32") were confirmed for the presence of alpha2,6-linked SA in total host cell protein extracts. ST6GAL1 OE Clone 32 was subsequently used to express SAFC human IgG1. The recombinant IgG expressed in this host cell line was confirmed to have alpha2,6-linked SA and increased total SA content. In conclusion, overexpression of St6gal1 is sufficient to produce recombinant proteins with increased sialylation and more human-like glycoprofiles without combinatorial engineering of other sialylation pathway genes. This work represents our ongoing effort of glycoengineering in CHO host cell lines for the development of "bio-better" protein therapeutics and cell culture vaccine production.
Results.
ST6GAL1 overexpression in IgG-producing cell lines and lectin-based enrichment in IgG-producing cell lines overexpressing ST6GAL1.
The IgG-producing lines Clone 27, Clone N22, and Clone N46 (described in Materials and Methods) were stably transfected with the St6gal1 expression vector under the same selection conditions. However, the three cell lines demonstrated different levels of cell surface FITC-SNA staining. Clone 27 had the strongest pre- and postenrichment staining (37.7% and 64.6% positive, respectively, Figure 1). Clone N46 was 14.7% positive prior to enrichment and sustained enrichment as well (39.1% positive, Figure 1). Clone N22 ST6GAL1 pool was zeocin-resistant but did not have positive FITC-SNA staining and did not proceed to enrichment (data not shown). Interestingly, St6gal1-relative mRNA levels by qRT-PCR indicated that the overexpression stable pools from Clone 27 and Clone N22 had similar levels of St6gal1, Clone N46 had over 5-fold higher St6gal1 mRNA than Clones 27 and N22, whereas the nontransfected controls did not have detectable St6gal1 mRNA (data not shown).
Three glycans were identified to contain sialic acid from IgG produced by Clone 27 St6gal1 OE and the nontransfected control (Supporting Information Figure 2). The sialylated glycans were further fragmented down to a single galactose for observing the fragmentation pattern (Figure 2). The fragmentation patterns of all three glycans indicated that the sialylation of nontransfected control to be primarily alpha2,3-linked, while Clone 27 St6gal1 OE gave a combination of alpha2,3- and alpha2,6-linked.
IgG harvested and purified from late-exponential phase batch cultures (Day 7 of culture) demonstrated increased total sialic acid content in the enriched stable pool overexpressing ST6GAL1 derived from Clone 27, but not in Clone N46 (Figure 3). This is consistent with the higher percentage of FITC-SNA (+) population in the former enriched stable pool, which indicated a higher overall content of alpha2,6-linked sialic acid.
Significant enrichment of St6gal1 overexpression in the clonal cell lines derived from the CHOZN  GS host cell line.
The CHOZN  GS host cell line was transfected and enriched for FITC-SNA (+) population as previously described for the IgG-producing cell lines. The enriched ST6GAL1 stable pool demonstrated 25% FITC-SNA (+) compared to pre-enrichment (12%, data not shown here). The clonal outgrowth of the FITC-SNA stained and nonstained cells was equal after FACS plating (data not shown), indicating no growth inhibition or cytotoxicity from lectin staining. Thirty-seven single-cell clones were selected based on their percentage of FITC-SNA (+) populations and expanded to repeat the FACS analysis. Figure 4A gave FITC-SNA histograms of two representative clones. The majority of the clones that outgrew from the enriched population demonstrated increased FITC-SNA fluorescence in 96-well culture (Panel B), and the 35 clones selected sustained high FITC-SNA fluorescence in 24-well cultures (Panel C). Twelve clones with the highest FITC-SNA fluorescence in 24-well were expanded to TPP tube cultures for further characterization. Interestingly, FITC-SNA stain (% positive) reduced after adapted in shaken cultures for some clones, while the others maintained the same. This resulted a poor linear correlation (R2 = 0.5) for the % FITC-SNA (+) for the shaken versus static cultures (data not shown).
Two-color FACS analysis indicated the presence of both alpha2,6- and alpha2,3-linked sialic acid in the ST6GAL1 overexpression clones.
A two-color staining method was optimized to detect surface sialic acid with both linkage types simultaneously. Figure 4 in Supporting Information illustrates that there was no competition between MALII and SNA using this protocol, as indicated by the excellent correlation with a slope of 1.02 between the two- and single-color staining. All 12 ST6GAL1 overexpression clones are 100% MALII (+) with various percentages of SNA (+) cells (Figure 5). ST6GAL1 Clone 32 is notably the highest % FITC-SNA among the 12 clones in all stages of expansion. The nontransfected CHOZN  GS host cell line is also 100% MALII (+), but no FITC-SNA stain above background. This implies that the two sialyltransferases are independent in forming terminal sialic acid residues when the substrate is abundant.
Expression assessment of endogenous ST3 sialyltransferases in the ST6GAL1 overexpression clones.
Cells were harvested during exponential growth phase of TPP cultures and analyzed using qRT-PCR for the recombinant St6gal1 and three ST3 sialyltransferases (St3gal3, St3gal4, and St3gal6) in the 12 ST6GAL1 overexpression clones. St3gal3, 4, and 6 has been reported in literature to be expressed in CHO cells, whereas the absence of St6gal1 transcript is reported in CHO cells. All the ST6GAL1 overexpression clones express detectable levels of mRNA of St6gal1 (Figure 6). Interestingly, no linear correlation was observed between the surface SNA stain and St6gal1 mRNA levels. Western blot results were unavailable (Materials and Methods in Supporting Information) due to lack of commercial antibodies to Chinese hamster ST6GAL1. The expression levels of the ST3 sialyltransferases appear to be independent of the recombinant St6gal1 expression in these clones, with St3gal4 being the highest expressing sialyltransferase, followed by St3gal6 and St3gal3 nondetected (data not shown). All clones have similar levels of surface alpha2,3-linked sialic acid as detected by MALII lectin stain (data not shown).
Sialic acid linkage analysis of total cell protein.
There is striking difference between the N-glycan profiles between GS (-/-) host cell line and the two ST6GAL1 OE cell lines (ST6GAL1_OE_31 and 32). As illustrated in Figure 7, there are no sialylated glycans identified in "2E3" due to their low abundance. By contrast, mono-, bi-, tri-, and tetrasialylated N-glycans are identified in both ST6GAL1 OE cell lines. ST6GAL1_OE_32 demonstrated all but one sialylated population to contain both alpha2,3- and alpha2,6-linkages. ST6GAL1_OE_31, on the other hand, has several populations that cannot be confirmed to have alpha2,6-linked sialic acid (Figure 8). The most abundant sialylated N-glycan for both ST6GAL1 OE cell lines is the bisialylated, fucosylated (GlcNAc)4(Man)3(Gal)2(Fuc)(NeuAc)2. ST6GAL1_OE_32 has 9% of this glycan, a 1.8-fold increase compared to 31. ST6GAL1_OE_31 contains higher mono-sialylated glycans, albeit some only contain alpha2,3-linkage. The complete glycan identification results are included in Table 2 in Supporting Information. The linkage analysis results indicated that overexpression of ST6GAL1 led to increase in complex glycans. Higher levels of St6gal1 expression in ST6GAL1_OE_32 also resulted in higher relative content alpha2,6-linked sialylated glycans compared to ST6GAL1_OE_31.
Productivity, glycoform profiles, sialylated glycan, and linkage analysis of IgG expressed in the selected St6gal1 OE host cell line.
In seven-day simple fed-batch cultures, the two stable pools generated from ST6GAL1_OE_32 host cell line produced significantly more IgG than the nonengineered host cell line using minus glutamine selection (Figure 9A). Viability was above 90% when harvested for all cultures. Intact protein mass analyses of the two IgG stable pools derived from two transfections using ST6GAL1_OE_32 host cell line revealed three significant peaks of 50850, 51011, and 51303 Da, all larger than the G2F glycoform (Figure 9B). The peaks indicated complex glycoforms that are likely sialylated and consist of 4.5%-9.1% of total glycoforms. By contrast, these peaks were not detected in the control IgG stable pools derived from CHOZN  GS host cell line (Figure 9C). The IgG produced in ST6GAL1_OE_32 host cell line also appeared to have a lower relative abundance of the G0F and G2F glycoforms than IgG produced in CHOZN  GS host cell line (Figure 9B), which may contribute to the increased relative content of more complex glycoforms (G1FS1, G2FS1, and G2FS2). G2FS2 peaks were identified, but they did not meet the cutoff for % total glycoforms therefore only noted presence but not quantified.
Released glycan HPLC analysis indicated that IgG produced in ST6GAL1_OE_32 host cell line had more sialic acid per molecule (Figure 10A). This assessment is based on the mass spectral identification of the features eluting in the normal phase HILIC chromatography (Figure 10B). Also corroborating the MS-based ID is the late elution of the hydrophilic sialylated glycans, which matches the trend seen with the released glycans of transferrin that was used as an external control (data not shown). Only terminal N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA) was detected. N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) was not detected in this a model human IgG, nor in previous studies using our CHO cell lines (data not shown here). Western blotting using biotinylated SNA showed strong positive bands at 50 kDa, indicating the glycosylated heavy chain, for IgG produced in both ST6GAL1 stable pools, and no bands were detected for the IgG produced in the control CHOZN  GS-transfected pools (Figure 10B). A duplicate SDS-PAGE gel stained with Coomassie Blue was included in Figure 6 in Supporting Information. This validated the presence of alpha2,6-linked sialic acid in the IgG produced in both ST6GAL1 stable pools.
