Charge heterogeneity: Basic antibody charge variants with increased binding to Fc receptors.
ABSTRACT.
We identified active isoforms of the chimeric anti-GD2 antibody, ch14.18, a recombinant antibody produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells, which is already used in clinical trials. We separated the antibody by high resolution ion-exchange chromatography with linear pH gradient elution into acidic, main and basic charge variants on a preparative scale yielding enough material for an in-depth study of the sources and the effects of microheterogeneity. The binding affinity of the charge variants toward the antigen and various cell surface receptors was studied by Biacore. Effector functions were evaluated using cellular assays for antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and complement-dependent cytotoxicity. Basic charge variants showed increased binding to cell surface receptor FcgammaRIIIa, which plays a major role in regulating effector functions. Furthermore, increased binding of the basic fractions to the neonatal receptor was observed. As this receptor mediates the prolonged half-life of IgG in human serum, this data may well hint at an increased serum half-life of these basic variants compared to their more acidic counterparts. Different glycoform patterns, C-terminal lysine clipping and N-terminal pyroglutamate formation were identified as the main structural sources for the observed isoform pattern. Potential differences in structural stability between individual charge variant fractions by nano differential scanning calorimetry could not been detected. Our in-vitro data suggests that the connection between microheterogeneity and the biological activity of recombinant antibody therapeutics deserves more attention than commonly accepted.
Results.
Chromatographic separation, confirmation of identity and quality control of starting material.
The method previously introduced and validated by Lingg et al. for the analytical separation of antibody charge variants using highly linear pH gradients was scaled up to preparative scale and applied to 3 different production batches of the ch14.18 a chimeric anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody intended for cancer immunotherapy ("Newton," "Darwin," "Curie"), which were manufactured at different stages during product development. Batch "Newton" contains the oldest material, produced in 2004, batch "Darwin" was the result of an engineering run in 2011 after introducing minor changes in the downstream process and batch "Curie" was produced in 2013 after the production process was transferred to a new contract manufacturer.
The chromatograms, as well as a comparison of the isoelectric focusing pattern of batches "Newton," "Darwin" and "Curie," (Figs. 1-4) show very similar isoform distributions. All three samples contain a main peak or gel band, flanked by a considerable number of acidic variants and a small amount of basic variants. This is a typical isoform distribution for IgG samples, given that many different kinds of protein modifications are possible, resulting in a shift of the pI value to either side of the main peak for a certain number of molecules. A clearly noticeable difference can be seen for batch "Newton," which seems to contain less of the main fraction and larger amounts of both acidic and basic variants (Fig. 1). "Newton" is the oldest among the investigated batches and it was stored in a different formulation buffer, which may explain the increased number of variants. Environmental factors and storage conditions, such as temperature and the buffer system used, can have a profound effect on the microheterogeneity pattern of a protein solution, and different variants may have accumulated in the sample over the prolonged storage period. Another possible explanation is that the batches "Darwin" and "Curie" contain fewer variants due to changes in the downstream process.
Despite the differences for batch "Newton" in comparison to the other batches, it was possible to fractionate the material eluting from the column in a similar fashion for all 3 batches. The chromatograms obtained for batches "Newton," "Darwin" and "Curie" showed a qualitatively comparable shape, while exhibiting quantitative differences in the abundance of the variants (Figs. 1-3). Five acidic fractions (A1-A5), one main peak fraction (M) and 2 basic fractions (B1, B2) were identified and collected for each of the investigated antibodies. Isoelectric focusing (Fig. 4) showed that all those fractions still contained a mixture of different variants, corresponding to multiple bands visible on the gel. However, it was possible to enrich specific acidic and basic variants and obtain an almost pure main peak. Especially the fractions on both extremes of the pH spectrum contained a much larger amount of isoforms corresponding to bands that were hardly visible in the starting material. This high enrichment of specific variants provides the opportunity to collect enough material for extensive investigation using methods with high samples demand such as glycan analysis or peptide mapping.
To eliminate the possibility that these additional isoforms were created during the separation procedure, an additional preparative scale experiment was carried out in which the fractions were pooled together after fractionation, concentrated and analyzed for its microheterogeneity pattern via isoelectric focusing (IEF; positive control sample PC in Fig. 4). Compared to the starting material, no differences could be detected in the IEF profile of this control sample, which suggests that the ion-exchange chromatography (IEX) used is indeed appropriate for detection and separation of antibody charge variants without affecting the original isoform profile.
Analytical scale chromatography was performed to evaluate the quantitative differences in the microheterogeneity of the separated fraction. Fig. 5 shows an overlay of the analytical chromatograms of the "Newton" fractions compared to the starting material. Once again, a clear enrichment of individual peaks could be confirmed.
For batch "Newton," we collected enough of fraction B2 that it could be used as a starting material for a more refined separation step, applying a shallower pH gradient to achieve better isoform separation. Based on this procedure, the fractions B21-B25 were obtained (Fig. 6). This second separation step could not be done with the other batches because the B2 fraction did not contain enough material. An analytical scale pH gradient elution was performed from fractions B22-B25 (Fig. 7), clearly demonstrating that even those sub fractions are not pure charge variants. Fraction B21 contained too little protein to perform the analytical pH gradient method.
In considering just 3 modifications responsible for charge variants, i.e., sialylation (0-4 sialic acids per mAb), pyroglutamate formation (0-4 affected N-termini per mAb) and lysine clipping (0-2 affected C-termini per mAb), the number of possible charge variants (213) is already in the high thousands. Even if only a fraction of those theoretically possible variants is actually present in a sample, it is not surprising that, in spite of high-resolution separation techniques, no pure isoform fractions could be observed.
To ensure that the starting material was free of proteins aggregates, which could compromise the results in later performed assays such as ADCC, size-exclusion chromatography coupled with multiple angle light scattering detection (SEC-MALS) was performed for all 3 batches (Fig. 8). Neither batch "Darwin" nor "Curie" contained any measurable amounts of aggregates or fragments. For batch "Newton" on the other hand, 3 different peaks were detected. The largest one, corresponding to the monomer, accounted for 95% of the sample, an earlier eluting aggregate peak was ~1.5% and a later eluting fragment peak made up 3.5% of the total sample material. Given the fact that "Newton" is the oldest of the 3 batches and already out of specifications for clinical use, a certain amount of aggregation and fragmentation in this sample is not surprising. The detected levels are still in an acceptable range and should therefore not have a decisive influence on the biological assays. Typically, aggregation levels below 2% are not considered to be a cause for concern.
Influence of charge variants on antigen binding and effector functions.
In vitro and cellular assays were performed to assess the biological efficacy of the individual charge variant fractions. Due to the high sample demand for some of these methods, not all analyses could be performed for all fractions.
SPR analysis for binding to GD2 (Fig. 9) showed a clear increase in target binding strength from the acidic toward the main peak fraction and the more basic charge variants for all investigated mAbs. A similar, though less pronounced, trend could be observed for the biding assay of the mAbs toward the Fc receptors, with main peak and basic variants showing better performance than acidic variants. (Figs. 10 and 11). In the FcgammaRIIIa assay, the only fraction that showed significantly higher binding strength than the reference in all 3 investigated batches was B2. For this fraction, a remarkably lower Kd, and therefore increased binding toward the FcgammaRIIIa receptor, was observed, with this effect being more pronounced in batch "Newton" than in the other 2 batches. A higher affinity for FcgammaRIIIa indicates an increased ADCC response, and therefore predicts a higher efficacy for the corresponding variants.
In the FcRn assay, the basic fractions again showed a slightly higher interaction strength toward the receptor than the more acidic fractions. This could be a first indication of a prolonged serum half-life of these fractions. However, it remains unclear whether the observed difference in binding strength is large enough to have a considerable influence on the in-vivo process. To confirm any such correlation, pharmacokinetic experiments must be conducted with the separated material, which exceeds the scope of this study.
The general trend of increased efficacy of the main and the basic variants compared to the acidic ones was confirmed by the biological assays for ADCC and CDC (Figs. 12 and 13). The main peak and the basic variant B1 showed a significantly better performance in both the ADCC and the CDC assay. The particularly strong binding of B2 toward FcgammaRIIIa, did not manifest itself as higher activity in the ADCC assay. Given that any kind of cellular assay will always be much more complex than a simple protein-protein interaction measurement, but also much more similar to the expected effect in vivo, we demonstrated that a simple characterization of antibody variants via receptor binding is not enough to estimate the efficacy of isoforms in vivo. The ADCC activity of an antibody is not solely defined by its affinity to the FcgammaRIIIa receptor, but by many other factors, e.g., structural modifications.
Relationship of function and biochemical and biophysical properties.
With a detailed set of data about the influence of microheterogeneity on antigen biding and effector functions available, we investigated the possible structural causes of the observed effects and their influence on structural integrity and stability of the product. Glycan analysis and peptide mapping were performed to address the first issue. As an indicator for overall structural stability, thermal unfolding was measured via Nano-DSC.
With respect to glycosylation, 4 groups of structures were previously reported to have significant impact on mAb efficacies and performance in cell based assays: sialylated structures, complex nonfucosylated structures, high mannose type structures and complex nongalactosylated structures. Glycan analysis was set up to investigate these 4 groups in detail. The first group of sialylated structures are a charged sugar moiety, and the presence of sialic acid influences the pI of a monoclonal antibody molecule. Furthermore, it is documented in the literature that monoclonal antibodies containing high amounts of this residue show a decreased performance in ADCC assays. Complex type non-fucosylated structures were investigated because those are known to have a higher affinity toward the FcgammaRIIIa receptor. High mannose type glycan structures, on the other hand, are expected to show decreased CDC, and are therefore of interest for the performance of antibodies. The fourth group of target glycan structures in this study, the complex type non-galactosylated molecules, have been described to alter the affinity of an antibody molecule toward C1q, the initial component of the complement cascade and can therefore also be expected to affect the performance in CDC assays. Whether this affinity change occurs in a positive or negative manner remains unclear at this point, as both have been reported in the literature.
Our glycan data (Fig. 14) shows a much higher amount of sialylated glycan structures in the acidic charge variant fractions compared to the main and basic ones (Fig. 14B), which suggests that sialic acid is indeed at least one of the modifications responsible for the observed microheterogeneity pattern. Furthermore, the obtained sialylation profile of the individual isoform fractions also correlates well with the ADCC data. Although sialylation might not be the only contributing factor, we demonstrated that, at least for our antibody, there is a strong link between antibody in-vitro efficacy and sialylation content.
With respect to the complex type non-fucosylated glycans, only one fraction contained a considerably different amount of non-fucosylated N-glycans than the others (Figs. 14A and 15). This was B2 of batch "Newton," which had also shown significantly stronger binding to the FcgammaRIIIa receptor. This confirms what was expected from the available literature. The same correlation could be observed for batch "Curie," although to a lesser degree, as this batch B2 contains slightly lower amounts of non-fucosylated glycans than B1.
For the high-mannose type structures, the situation was similar (Fig. 14 A). Once again, the only fraction for which a noticeably different value could be measured was B2 of batch "Newton." High-mannose type glycans therefore do not provide a satisfactory explanation for the observed behavior of our charge variants in the CDC assay. Though B2 of batch "Newton" does in fact show comparatively weak performance in the CDC assay, the general trend of an activity increase from the acidic variants toward M and B1 cannot be attributed to this group of glycan structures. Regarding the complex, non-galactosylated glycans, no characteristic differences were observed in the charge variant fractions (Fig. 15B). Thus, it remains doubtful if there really is a link between these types of sugar residues and the ability of an antibody to elicit an effective CDC response. Summarizing glycan data, our method is clearly able to enrich sialylated glycoforms in the early eluting fractions, and complex-non fucosylated and high-mannose-type structures in the later eluting ones.
Peptide map data (Fig. 16) was obtained focusing on 4 different types of modifications on amino acids located in or in close proximity to the complementarity-determining regions (CDRs), the binding sites for C1q and the Fc receptor or the C- and N-termini of the protein. With respect to the deamidation of asparagine residues, no significant differences could be observed between the charge variant fractions (data not shown).
In fraction B2, a remarkably high value for oxidation of methionine residue M34 in the CDR1 could be observed. Oxidation of methionine and tryptophan residues by itself should not have an effect on the charge heterogeneity of a given sample. The modifications may, however, result in conformational changes in the protein, bringing other charged residues to the surface of the molecule and thereby making them available for interaction in IEX chromatography. Oxidation reactions on residues located in the CDRs of the antibody could very well result in a different binding affinity toward its molecular target. For our fraction B2, the detected modification does not seem to result in a profound effect on the binding levels to GD2, which were only slightly lower than for the main fraction.
N-terminal pyroglutamate formation results in the change of the pKa values of the amine and carboxy group and a loss of a positive and a negative charge at neutral pH. At basic pH, only the loss of the negatively charged carboxyl group is relevant because the N-terminus gets deprotonated at a pH of around 7.7. Literature suggests that this type of modification has no substantial effect on antigen binding affinity, efficacy and safety of the antibody product. An increased amount of this modification was found mainly in fraction B1 and to a lesser extent in B2, suggesting an explanation for the observed behavior of those fractions in IEF and IEX. The high level of pyroglutamate in fraction A3 were surprising. We therefore tried to confirm this result by comparing it to peptide map data from stressed material from the same batch, which was also available to us. This material was stored at 40 C for 30 d and then separated with preparative pH gradient elution. The acidic variant A3 in the stressed sample did not show any elevated levels of pyroglutamate, which indicated that the value from the unstressed A3 sample is an outlier (data not shown).
Lysine clipping at the C-terminus results in the removal of one positive charge. Similar to N-terminal pyroglutamate formation, so far, no further effects on structure and biological functions of the molecule have been observed. Once again, this modification was found in significantly higher amounts in fractions B1 and seems to be contributing to the more basic characteristics of this variant fraction.
Overall, the peptide map data confirms once again that C-terminal Lysine clipping and N-terminal pyroglutamate formation are of decisive importance for the presence of basic isoforms in monoclonal antibodies.
What comes as a surprise is that our pH gradient elution method also seems to have a separation effect on molecules that show elevated oxidation levels at residue M34, since methionine sulfoxide does not have a charged side chain. It is likely that the oxidation of methionine changes the surrounding protein surface enough to influence binding to a cation-exchange stationary phase.
The lack of separation of mAbs with deamidated asparagine was likewise unexpected because the charged aspartate or iso-aspartate side chains should influence binding behavior. This may be due to the fact that we were only taking into account residues positioned in areas of the molecule involved in binding to Fc-receptors, antigen and C1q. It is still possible that the overall deamidation levels in the molecule have a decisive influence on the observed microheterogeneity pattern.
As it is easily, measureable thermal stability is often used as an indicator for overall structural integrity and long-term stability of proteins. In case of IgG molecules, a thermal unfolding experiment typically results in 2 or 3 peaks and their corresponding melting temperatures (Tm) are associated with the unfolding of the CH2 domain, the Fab, and the CH3 domain. In many cases, including ours, the first 2 peaks are not recognizable as 2 individual signals but are merged together into one bigger peak with a minor shoulder. The first thermal transition is usually taken into account as a reference number for stability determination because it occurs at lower temperature than the one for the CH3 domain. Concerning our variants fractions, little to no differences could be observed in between the separated charge variants (Fig. 17). If anything, the main peak and its neighboring fractions show a slightly higher Tm1 than the other variants, indicating a slightly better stability of the CH2 domain and the Fab in these fractions.
