Investigation of the interactions of critical scale-up parameters (pH, pO2 and pCO2) on CHO batch performance and critical quality attributes.
Understanding process parameter interactions and their effects on mammalian cell cultivations is an essential requirement for robust process scale-up. Furthermore, knowledge of the relationship between the process parameters and the product critical quality attributes (CQAs) is necessary to satisfy quality by design guidelines. So far, mainly the effect of single parameters on CQAs was investigated. Here, we present a comprehensive study to investigate the interactions of scale-up relevant parameters as pH, pO2 and pCO2 on CHO cell physiology, process performance and CQAs, which was based on design of experiments and extended product quality analytics. The study used a novel control strategy in which process parameters were decoupled from each other, and thus allowed their individual control at defined set points. Besides having identified the impact of single parameters on process performance and product quality, further significant interaction effects of process parameters on specific cell growth, specific productivity and amino acid metabolism could be derived using this method. Concerning single parameter effects, several monoclonal antibody (mAb) charge variants were affected by process pCO2 and pH. N-glycosylation analysis showed positive correlations between mAb sialylation and high pH values as well as a relationship between high mannose variants and process pH. This study additionally revealed several interaction effects as process pH and pCO2 interactions on mAb charge variants and N-glycosylation pattern. Hence, through our process control strategy and multivariate investigation, novel significant process parameter interactions and single effects were identified which have to be taken into account especially for process scale-up.
Electronic supplementary material.
The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s00449-016-1693-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Results and discussion.
Experiments were carried out according to our experimental design as specified in the "Materials and methods" section. The specific data points for the PLS models are summarized in the supplementary file. Concerning the evaluation of the data, additionally to our controlled process parameters, the influences of important uncontrolled parameters on the responses of the design of experiments were considered. Especially effects that might occur due to different osmolalities, average cell viabilities and overall process time.
Although only minor variations in osmolality occurred during cell growth (mostly between 290 and 330 mOsm/kg), the influence of variations in osmolality was investigated in separate experiments and no significant differences in cell specific growth, productivity or metabolite production/consumption could be derived for this cell line (data not shown).
The overall batch process time and mean cell viabilities in this study correlate strongly with process pH but not with pO2 and pCO2 (Fig. 1). Therefore, effects on product quality data attributed to process pH might furthermore derive from different process times or mean cell viabilities. Effects of pCO2 and pO2 were found to be independent from process time. The authors would like to state that due to the complexity of mammalian cell culture processes, only a certain portion of the data variability can be explained by the presented models. Therefore, the goodness of fit R 2, a measure how good the model fits the observed data, and the goodness of prediction Q 2, an estimate of the predictive ability of the model, deviate from the ideal value of 1. However, R 2 and Q 2 values are presented in the corresponding data tables and only significant models with values above 0.5 are discussed.
Effects on cell growth and viability.
Cell growth and cell viability are essential parameters that have to be monitored closely during mammalian fermentation processes. This is usually done by automated offline cell counting and live/dead cell staining. Through determination of viable and total cell densities (VCD and TCD) specific cell growth and cell viabilities were evaluated.
Comparing the maximum viable cell density (VCD) of all batch processes, it can be derived that processes at pH 7.0 reached the highest maximum viable cell densities (Fig. 1a). All processes declined in viabilities to values lower than 75 % shortly after limitation of the main C-source. Therefore, differences in maximum VCD derived not only from different growth behavior but furthermore from nutrient availability. Cell viabilities stayed at high values and decreased dramatically as soon as glucose became limiting. Furthermore, slight decreases in cell viabilities could be detected for processes at pH 7.0 and 6.8, most probably due to glutamine limitation before final glucose depletion (Figs. 1b, 2a/b).
Regarding specific cell growth during exponential growth (micro max) and total growth phase (micro average) significant influences of pH, pO2 and pCO2 as well as a significant interaction of pH and pCO2 could be detected (Table 2). micro max and micro average were strongly affected by process conditions, whereby the lowest growth rates were reduced to around 35 and 45 %, respectively, when compared to the maximum values obtained in this DoE.
Table 2 shows that pH affected specific cell growth the most and higher pH values led to higher cell growth. Increased pCO2 had a negative impact on cell growth, whereas increased pO2 seemed to stimulate specific cell growth between the borders of our experimental design. These general results confirm other publications as Link et al., Yoon et al., Trummer et al. and Dezengotita et al.. Remarkably, through the independent control of process parameters our study derived additional significant interaction effects of pH and pCO2 on specific growth.
Effects on cell metabolism and productivity.
CHO cell metabolism strongly depends on the main carbon and energy sources, glucose and glutamine. Furthermore, by-product accumulation can be of high interest since lactate and ammonia concentrations can affect cell physiology at elevated levels. Moreover, specific productivity of cells is clearly of high importance, because final product titer levels are directly correlated with this entity. Additionally, amino acids are one of the most important cell culture media components, influencing cell growth and productivity.
In Table 2 the result for the DoE evaluation regarding the average specific glucose uptake rate q gluc is shown. q gluc was significantly influenced by process pH whereby lowest rates were reduced to around 60 % when compared to the maximum consumption rates obtained in this DoE. No significant pO2, pCO2 or quadratic/interaction terms could be determined. These results can be confirmed by other studies.
The mean specific glutamine uptake rate was not significantly influenced by pH or pCO2 or pO2 (data not shown). Concerning pH this is in accordance to the results from Yoon et al. but contrary to Trummer et al. who observed higher specific consumption rates at higher pH values. Processes at high pH values depleted earlier of glutamine than processes at low pH (Fig. 2). Since no effects on specific glutamine uptake rates could be determined, this effect is most probably due to higher viable cell densities and thus higher total glutamine consumptions at high pH values.
The average specific lactate production rate q lac was significantly affected by process conditions (Table 1), whereby lowest rates were reduced to around 80 % when compared to the maximum production rates obtained in this study. Comparing the specific lactate production q lac during the growth phase, data clearly shows a direct link between pH and lactate production. Runs at highest pH values produced significantly more lactate than cells at lower pH. This effect is well reported in literature. Furthermore, the yield of glucose to lactate was affected by culture pH, higher pH values leading to higher yields. Dependencies of q lac from pO2 or pCO2 could not be found.
No significant effects of either pH, pCO2 or pO2 on specific ammonia production could be observed (data not shown). This is in agreement with the results from Yoon et al. but contrary to Trummer et al., who found a dependency of specific ammonia production from culture pH. The contrary findings on specific ammonia production and glutamine consumption in the stated literature may indicate that effects on ammonia and glutamine metabolism are more cell line specific than effects on glucose and lactate metabolism.
Due to higher specific glucose consumption rates and higher cell growth, processes became glucose-limited earliest at pH 7.2 (Fig. 2a). Ammonia profiles varied between phases of ammonia production and consumption throughout most processes at 7.0 (Fig. 2c). All fermentation runs at pH 6.8 showed no significant ammonia consumption over process time and thus resulted in general higher final ammonia concentrations. Similar to Li et al. low levels of lactate during the lactate consumption phase, present at most processes at pH 7.0 and 6.8, led to the consumption of alanine (data not shown) and subsequently to an increase in final ammonia levels.
Additionally to glutamine, 19 other amino acids were analyzed by HPLC. Specific consumption or production rates were calculated during the growth phase and significant models could be derived for nine amino acids (Table 3). Hereby, higher pH values led to a higher consumption of several amino acids (Ser, Asp, Val, Ile, Arg and His). Similar effects were reported from Trummer et al.. Furthermore, significant effects of pO2 and pCO2 on various amino acid consumption rates could be derived indicating higher consumption rates at process conditions that were favorable for cell growth (micro max, micro average). To our knowledge, no effects of pO2 or pCO2 on specific amino acid consumption or production rates in CHO cells have been shown before in the literature. Seven out of nine specific amino acid consumption or production rates were significantly affected by process parameter interactions; this demonstrates that interaction effects of process parameters on cell physiology have to be considered.
Amino acids could be divided into three groups. The first group consisted of amino acids that were only consumed throughout the batch processes (Arg, Val, Phe, Iso, Leu, Pro, Asn, Ser, His, Tyr, Lys, Trp and Met), the second contains amino acids that were only produced over process time (Gly, Cys, Glu) and the last one consists of aspartate and alanine, which were produced and/or consumed during the batch processes (data not shown). In contrast to Trummer et al., aspartate was only produced at lower pH values. Processes were not limited in any amino acid before process harvest except of glutamine for processes at pH 7.0 and 6.8 (Fig. 2b). Similar to effects reported from Zagari et al. and Wahrheit et al. cells reacted to glutamine limitation via uptake of alternative carbon sources as lactate and aspartate, except processes at pH 7.0, pCO2 20 %, pO2 25 % and pH 6.8, pCO2 20 % and pO2 10 % which showed no lactate consumption or very low consumption after glutamine limitation (Fig. 2d).
The average specific IgG production rate q P was significantly affected by process conditions, whereby lowest rates were reduced to around 30 % when compared to the maximum production rates obtained in this study.
The model data out of Table 2 indicates that pH strongly affected specific productivity in a way that high pH set points led to high q p values. Furthermore, quadratic effects of pCO2, linear effects of pO2 and an interaction term of pCO2 and pH were identified. Positive effects of pO2 on q p are also reported in Link et al., whereas Trummer et al. found no connections between pO2 and q p. Concerning pCO2 Gray et al. showed optimum levels around 76 mmHg, which is in agreement with our findings. No effects of culture pH on q p could be shown in studies from Trummer et al. and Yoon et al.. However, other authors reported similar results, whereby q p increased with increasing pH between pH 6.8 and 7.2. Contradictions between the stated findings might derive from the different cell lines used in these studies. Additionally, pH and pCO2 interaction effects similar to those already observed for micro average and micro max could be detected for q p. To our knowledge, no interaction effects of pH and pCO2 on cell specific productivity have been reported so far in the literature. The derived model showed similar coefficients to that one obtained for micro max and micro average. This indicates that fermentation conditions that induce high specific growth rates also induce high specific production rates for this cell line.
Overall process titer of batch processes was mostly dependent from the integral viable cell density similar to Trummer et al.. Therefore, highest final product concentrations could be derived at pH 7.0 and 6.8, whereas space-time-yields were higher for processes at pH 7.0 (Fig. 3).
Effects on critical quality attributes (CQAs).
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) for determination of antibody size heterogeneity.
During manufacturing and storage antibody size variants (e.g., aggregates and fragments) occur. Since size variants can influence immunogenicity, potency and pharmacokinetics their levels are monitored during lot release, stability and characterization.
Data out of SEC analysis show minor variations with overall purity levels between 96 and 98 % relative Area (data not shown). PLS models for sum of aggregates and sum of fragments were conducted. No dependencies of pCO2, pO2 or pH on antibody aggregation or fragmentation were obtained from the gathered model data. Jing et al. observed a significant increase in protein aggregation when changing dissolved oxygen from 50 to 15 % air saturation. Concerning pH, values far away from the isoelectric point of the desired antibody showed better protein solubility. In contrast to Gomes and Hiller, we could not detect any changes in protein aggregation when varying culture conditions in between the DoE settings. The mechanisms leading to product aggregation may be strongly product specific, explaining the differences between the results in the literature.
Cation exchange chromatography (CEX) for determination of antibody charge heterogeneity.
Charge based antibody characterization is a frequently used tool since it is sensitive to many type of modifications as protein conformation, size, sequence species, glycosylation and posttranslational modifications. Therefore, various antibody variations that occur with changing process conditions were detected.
In total, we detected 18 different charge variants, whereby significant models could be obtained for six individual variants (i)-(vi) and one sum parameter (Fig. 4; Table 4).
(i) The content of acidic charge variant 1 (deamidation of asparagine to aspartate on one light chain) was significantly influenced by culture pH (Table 4). Deamidation is an unavoidable alteration reaction that takes place in fermentation broth after secretion of the cell. Deamidation can finally contribute to heterogeneity; affect protein crystallization, stability and efficacy. Therefore, Liu et al. considered Asn deamidation as one of the most important common modifications for mAbs. Deamidation in our batch process data differed significantly, whereas at pH 6.8 the highest protein deamidation could be observed (Fig. 4). In contradiction to the literature, our studies would suggest that lower pH values lead to higher deamidation rates.
(ii) Considering acidic species 2 lower pH values led to lower acidic variants (Fig. 4; Table 4). Additionally, a significant interaction term for pH and pCO2 affecting acidic variant 2 was identified.
(iii) Isomerization of Asp on one heavy chain, basic charge variant 1, is congeneric to the deamidation reaction leading to acidic charge variant 1. The isomerization reaction occurs spontaneously in the culture media. Data shows that pH had a significant effect on isomerization whereby at lower pH values, higher amounts of isomerized variants occurred (Fig. 4; Table 4). These findings are in agreement with the literature. Analogous to Asn deamidation, Asp isomerization is considered as one of the most important common modifications for mAbs.
(iv, v) The presence of lysine residues on one heavy chain, basic charge variant 2, was significantly affected by culture pH (Fig. 4; Table 4). Moreover, the amount of lysine residues on both heavy chains, basic charge variant 3, was also significantly affected by culture pH but with opposite outcome (Fig. 4; Table 4). For charge variant 2, lower culture pH led to lower amount of lysine residues compared to runs at higher pH values. In contrast, models obtained for charge variant 3 showed the opposite effect. C-terminal lysine residues are a very common modification observed during monoclonal antibody production. After cell lysis, the release of basic carboxypeptidase is supposed to be the reason for lysine heterogeneity, since no spontaneous reactions were found in other studies. Lower cell viabilities and prolonged process time at pH 6.8, therefore, should have led to a better cleavage of lysine residues from the antibody. Interestingly, this is only the case for lysine residue 2 whereas for charge variant 3 the opposite effect is visible. C-terminal lysine residues are considered as a rather less important mAb modification.
(vi) The amount of basic charge variant 4 was significantly influenced by process pH. The higher the pH value, the lower the amount of basic charge variant 4 (Fig. 4; Table 4). Moreover, a significant linear correlation with pCO2 could be conducted out of the PLS model.
Glycosylation profile analysis for determination of N-glycosylation heterogeneity.
Proper glycosylation of mAbs is of upmost importance since it can influence stability, effector functions, immunogenicity and pharmacokinetics of the desired product. 21 different glycosylation patterns could be identified whereby the only significant model concerning data from glycosylation analysis could be obtained for glycosylation pattern bG1FSA_2 (di-N-acetylneuraminic acidylated, mono-galactosylated, biantennary, fucosylated) (Table 4). Significant single effects of process pH and an interaction term with pCO2 on glycosylation variant bG1SA_2 were obtained. Analogous to Zanghi et al., these results would suggest a lower sialylation at higher dissolved carbon dioxide and higher pH values. Around 75 % of the observed glycosylation profiles consisted of bG0F (biantennary, fucosylated) and bG1F (biantennary, mono-galactosylated, fucosylated) independent from process conditions similar to Agarabi et al. and as reported by Raju et al.. Furthermore, galactosylation, sialylation and afucosylation level (GI, SI, aFI) variations stayed in between narrow limits, mostly 25-30 % GI, 0.5-1.5 % SI and 4-8.0 % aFI, for all batch processes. Moreover, GI, aFI and SI variation between center point runs covered most glycosylation variations observed.
When plotting GI over SI and aFI, GI values correlate positively with aFI and SI values (Fig. 5a linear determination coefficient R 2 = 0.66; Fig. 5b linear determination coefficient R 2 = 0.36). This indicates that afucosylation, sialylation and galactosylation were all influenced likewise by process conditions. Additionally, highest SI levels could be observed mostly for pH values of 7.2. Furthermore, lowest SI levels did not occur for high pO2 values at 40 %. Regarding sialylation and process pH similar trends could be detected from Ivarsson et al.. Moreover, high sialylation correlated with high Mannose 8 (Fig. 5c linear determination coefficient R 2 = 0.82) variants but not with Mannose 6 variants. Finally, highest amounts of mannose 6 and 8 variants could only be observed for pH values at 6.8 and 7.2 (Fig. 5d). A huge amount of process variables affecting protein glycosylation in mammalian cells have been reported as substrate concentrations, media composition, by-product accumulation, temperature, cell viability and shear stress. Literature about the influence of process parameters on mAb glycosylation are partly contradicting and seem to be strongly dependent on the specific cell line, product and cultivation conditions. Concerning pO2 variations different results are reported but consistent glycosylation profiles can be expected for DO between 10 and 100 %. Ivarsson et al. stated a slight increased protein galactosylation and sialylation at low DO 10 % and high DO 90 % compared to 50 % DO. Studies about the influence of pCO2 on glycosylation are less represented. Nevertheless, Zanghi et al. and Kimura and Miller showed decreased polysialylation and N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) when increasing pCO2. Trummer et al. reported no effect on EPO-FC sialylation when varying DO between 10 and 100 % and pH between 6.8 and 7.3. In contrast, Ivarsson et al. recently showed that galactosylation and sialylation levels slightly increased when pH increased between 6.8 and 7.2.
Finally, through our applied control strategy and experimental design, we could not only detect independent single process parameter effects on cell physiology and product quality but also furthermore derive several new process parameters interaction effects. A short summary of several key responses affected by process parameter interactions is given in Table 5.
