Application of maltose as energy source in protein-free CHO-K1 culture to improve the production of recombinant monoclonal antibody.
Oligosaccharides are generally considered to be un-utilized for growth of mammalian cells because their permeability across the cell membrane is low. However, in our previous study, we discovered that CHO and HEK293 cells consume maltose in culture media without serum and glucose. This is interesting because the transporter for maltose in mammalian cells has not been discovered to-date, and the only animal disaccharide transporter that is recently discovered is a sucrose transporter. The application of oligosaccharides in mammalian cell-based biopharmaceutical manufacturing can be beneficial, because it can theoretically increase carbohydrate content of the culture medium and decrease lactate production. Here, we first determined that specific maltose consumption rate in CHO cells was similar to galactose and fructose at 0.257 ng/cell/day. We then demonstrated that CHO cells can be cultivated with reasonable cell growth using higher maltose concentrations. After which, we evaluated the use of maltose supplementation in the production of a recombinant monoclonal antibody in batch and fed-batch cultures, demonstrating improvements in recombinant monoclonal antibody titer of 15% and 23% respectively. Finally, glycosylation profiles of the antibodies were analyzed.
Results.
Characterization of maltose metabolism kinetics.
To characterize the kinetics of maltose metabolism, SH87, a CHO-K1 cell line that produces an anti-Her2 monoclonal antibody was cultured in a protein free chemically defined medium (PFCDM) containing 4 g/l glucose supplemented with 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 10 or 20 g/l maltose, which gave maximum viable cell densities greater than 8 x 106 cells/ml. The specific maltose consumption rates were obtained from plots of maltose concentrations against cumulative integral viable cell densities (IVCD) according to Equation 4. These plots gave straight trendlines with R2 values between 0.853 and 0.999 when 3 to 5 data points after glucose depletion were used (Supplementary Fig. 1), suggesting that the specific maltose consumption rates were fairly constant when maltose was metabolized. The slopes of these trendlines gave the average specific maltose consumption rates of these cultures and are tabulated in Fig. 1A.
The specific maltose consumption rates increased with increasing initial maltose concentrations, verifying the concentration dependence of maltose metabolism at these concentrations. Additionally, it was observed that the magnitude of increase in specific consumption decreased at higher initial maltose concentrations, suggesting that there may be a maxima in this relationship. As such, the data was fitted to a Monod model according to Equation 5 by non-linear regression. The data fitted to the model (Fig. 1B) to obtain a maximum specific maltose consumption rate (qs_max) of 0.257 ng/cell/day and an affinity constant (Ks) of 7.03 g/l. Comparing with published specific monosaccharide consumption rates using 3.6 g/l of monosaccharides, the maximum specific maltose consumption rate determined here is similar to the specific consumption rates of fructose (0.21 ng/cell/day) and galactose (0.21 ng/cell/day) while being lower than the measured specific consumption rates of glucose (0.76 ng/cell/day) and mannose (0.88 ng/cell/day). This suggests that maltose can be metabolized at rates similar to fructose and galactose while maltose metabolism will be slower than that with glucose and mannose. As such, we described a first estimate of mammalian cell maltose metabolism kinetics that has not been previously reported.
Based on this model, we hypothesized that the CHO-K1 cells adapted to propagate in serum free medium with maltose as sole carbohydrate source should be able to proliferate faster with increasing maltose concentrations. We therefore evaluated the growth of these cells in PFCDM medium without glucose but supplemented with 3.6, 10, 20, 30 and 40 g/l maltose (Fig. 2). Exponential specific growth rates of the cultures were calculated using viable cell density data up till Day 5 according to Equation 1, to give 0.004, 0.0101, 0.0140, 0.0139 and 0.0107 h-1 respectively. Compared to CHO cells cultivated in normal medium with glucose which typically has a specific growth rate of about 0.03 h-1, this slower growth corroborates with the lower specific maltose consumption discussed above, and suggests that carbohydrate metabolism may be limiting in these maltose cultures. More importantly, the cells indeed proliferated faster with increasing maltose concentrations from 3.6 g/l to 20 and 30 g/l (Fig. 2A) to reach maximum viable cell density (VCD) of 1.6 x 106 cells/ml. Further increase in maltose concentration to 40 g/l gave a growth curve similar to the 10 g/l culture. This can be attributed to its initial high osmolality at 404 mOsm/kg (Fig. 2G), countering the effects of faster maltose metabolism.
Essential biochemicals in culture supernatant were also analyzed (Fig. 2B-F). From Fig. 2B, it is observed that glucose concentrations of all cultures remained below the instrument lower limit of 0.20 g/l up till Day 10. As cell proliferation was observed up to Day 7, this demonstrates that residual glucose could not have been responsible for the observed cell growth, and that maltose was likely used as an alternative carbohydrate source. From Day 11 onwards, glucose concentrations increased for the 30 g/l and 40 g/l cultures to 1.96 g/l and 1.25 g/l respectively, suggesting that a small percentage (6.5% and 3.1% respectively) of maltose was broken down: We postulate that there may be release of transiently active maltase from lysed cells during death phase, and the high maltose concentrations in these cultures may have resulted in faster and more noticeable breakdown of maltose to glucose in these cultures compared to cultures with lower maltose concentrations.
As for lactate, it was not detectable until Day 7 (Fig. 2C). We postulate that the delayed accumulation of lactate could be attributed to a reduced Warburg effect as a result of substituting glucose with maltose. This change in carbohydrate source may have compelled the cells to be more energy efficient instead of being dependent on glycolysis. From Day 7, lactate was only detected for the 20, 30 and 40 g/l cultures and not for the 3.6 and 10 g/l cultures. Day 7 also coincided with the cultures entering death phase. As such, we postulate that the cultures with higher maltose concentrations may have more glycolysis intermediates that were processed to lactate when the cells die.
From Fig. 2A,E and F, we observed a direct correlation between cell growth, glutamine consumption and ammonium production: cultures with faster growth had faster glutamine consumption and ammonium production. When specific rates were determined according to Equation 4, specific glutamine consumption were 0.795, 0.855, 1.431, 1.481 and 0.630 ng/cell/day respectively, and specific ammonia production prior to glutamine depletion were 1.399, 1.178, 1.863, 2.035 and 1.264 ng/cell/day respectively, corroborating with the observed correlation and suggesting that more glutamine was used to provide energy to support the faster cell growth observed in the 20 g/l and 30 g/l maltose cultures. These specific rates were also higher than the maximum maltose specific consumption rate of 0.257 ng/cell/day, and glutamine depletion coincided with peak VCD. These suggest that glutamine (and potentially other amino acids) is likely a main energy source in these cultures leading to ammonium production, and maltose provided an additional and limiting energy stream to allow the cells to proliferate in the absence of glucose.
Lastly, maltose utilization was observed to increase with increasing maltose concentrations (Fig. 2D). Calculated maltose concentrations based on our Monod model (Fig. 1) were also plotted (Fig. 2D), demonstrating that the observed maltose concentrations were in-line with calculated values.
Taken together, this data confirms that CHO-K1 cells can proliferate in maltose-only medium without serum, hydrolysates or protein supplements to cell density greater than 106 cells/ml. This also demonstrates that high maltose concentrations up to 30 g/L can be used for batch CHO cell culture without detrimental effects due to osmolality. As such, these results suggest that maltose can be used as a glucose-replacement in routine cultivation of adapted mammalian cell lines in serum-free media at a lower growth rate.
Comparison of batch cultures with high glucose and maltose concentrations.
To study the effect of supplementing maltose at high concentrations in batch production of antibodies, we compared the culture profiles of SH87 in media supplemented with 4 g/l glucose and 10 g/l or 20 g/l maltose, to cultures of the same cells in media containing 14 g/l and 24 g/l glucose (Fig. 3). The 24 g/l glucose culture grew slower, attained a lower maximum VCD of 10.6 x 106 cells/ml, and reached a low viability of less than 50% faster than the other 3 cultures (Fig. 3A). The slower growth of the 24 g/l glucose culture can be attributed to the higher osmolality (360 mOsm/kg) of the culture medium (Fig. 3F), while the culture media of the other 3 cultures had similar osmolality between 318 and 331 mOsm/kg that were in the optimum pH range for the cultivation of mammalian cells. This confirms a limitation of high glucose loading in batch culture medium because glucose contributes to osmolality significantly and can affect cell growth at high concentrations. In contrast, the same mass concentrations of maltose contributed to less increase in osmolality and thus had no negative effect on cell growth.
Comparing the growth profiles of the 10 g/l maltose, 20 g/l maltose and 14 g/l glucose cultures (Fig. 3A), they were similar even after glucose concentration reached its minimal on Day 5 for the maltose supplemented cultures (Fig. 3B). This suggests that maltose metabolism is not restricting cell growth, in contrast to previous observation of slower growth observed at maltose concentrations lower than 3 g/l after glucose depletion. The hypothesis of a higher maltose metabolism at these concentrations is supported by observations of glucose accumulation in the 10 g/l and 20 g/l maltose supplemented cultures (Fig. 3B), a phenomenon not observed in our previous study. This suggests that maltose was hydrolyzed faster than the cells' metabolic requirements during the corresponding culture times: Glucose accumulation was observed in the 20 g/l maltose supplemented culture after Day 5, when the cells were still growing at a similar rate as the 14 g/l glucose culture, demonstrating that maltose metabolism was not limiting cell growth. At lower maltose concentration of 10 g/l, glucose accumulation was observed only after Day 8, when the cells are entering death phase. With the cells growing similarly to the 14 g/l glucose culture, this indicates that maltose metabolism was just ample to support cell growth at 10 g/l maltose without excess glucose accumulating in the culture medium.
Also worth noting here is that the lactate consumption in the glucose only cultures were minimal throughout the culture duration, in contrast to the maltose supplemented cultures which consumed most of the lactate from Days 5 to 8 (Fig. 3C). While a second lactate production phase was observed after Days 9 and 10 for the 10 g/l and 20 g/l maltose supplemented cultures respectively, the lactate concentrations in these cultures reached significantly lower levels as compared to the glucose cultures. This verifies another limitation of glucose loading in batch culture medium: because lactate accumulation can result in cell toxicity, the lack of its consumption with high glucose loading can limit the growth of the cell culture. In this case, this lactate toxicity may have also contributed to the faster death phase observed for the 24 g/l glucose culture. Ammonium production profiles were similar for all 4 cultures (data not shown) because these cells were cultivated in the presence of glucose, and as such, ammonium is unlikely a contributing factor to growth and production differences in this experiment.
Examining the maltose profiles of the maltose supplemented cultures, maltose consumption were faster after glucose depletion on Day 5 (Fig. 3D), similar to previous data, and maltose was not depleted for both maltose supplemented cultures till the end of the run on Day 14. Similarly, glucose was not depleted for both glucose cultures (Fig. 3B). While sugars were present in excess, other nutrients may be limiting the growth of these cells, for example, glutamine was used up at Day 6 for all 4 cultures (Fig. 3E). These other limitations may have affected growth similarly to cause the similar growth profiles of the maltose supplemented cultures and the 14 g/l glucose culture.
With the similar growth profiles, it was interesting to note that the 20 g/l maltose supplemented culture resulted in a maximum IgG titer of 298 mg/l, 15% higher than that from the 14 g/l glucose culture and 10 g/l maltose supplemented cultures which gave maximum titers of 259 mg/l and 263 mg/l respectively (Fig. 3G). To examine this, the specific IgG productivities of the cultures were determined according to Equation 3 (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2). We noted that the specific IgG productivities for all 4 cultures decreased after Day 7, when glutamine concentrations reached their minimum, suggesting that glutamine may be limiting IgG productivity from Day 7. Regardless of glutamine limitation, we observed that specific IgG productivities were 21% to 29% higher in the culture with more glucose or with more maltose, suggesting that higher sugar concentrations can improve specific IgG productivities. When we compared the specific IgG productivities of maltose supplemented cultures with their corresponding glucose culture having the same total sugar concentration, the maltose supplemented cultures had 13% to 17% lower specific IgG productivities up to Day 6, in concurrence with the previous observations that maltose metabolism is less efficient than that of glucose. However, specific IgG productivities of maltose supplemented cultures became 25% to 26% higher than specific IgG productivities of their corresponding glucose culture from Day 7, after glutamine depletion and the cultures reached stationary phase, even though sugars were not limiting. As this cannot be accounted for by differences in IVCD profile (data not shown), we postulate that the higher lactate levels in the glucose cultures may have negatively impacted the IgG productivities from Day 7. As a result, the 20 g/l maltose supplemented culture had the highest maximum IgG titer of 297 mg/l, which is respectively 15% and 21% higher than that achieved in the 14 g/l and 24 g/l glucose cultures, despite similar growth profiles.
Application of maltose in fed-batch cultures.
Since fed-batch culture is a popular mode for the manufacturing of monoclonal antibodies, we evaluated the use of maltose in fed-batch cultures. In contrast to batch cultures where initial glucose concentration is limited by the detrimental effect on cell growth due to consequent increase in osmolality beyond a certain limit, fed-batch cultures do not have this limitation since glucose can be fed continually into the cultures. As such, we investigated whether maltose can be used to supplement glucose in fed-batch cultures to drive the cells towards a slower but more efficient metabolism: Using a common glucose concentration setpoint of 0.5 g/l, SH87 in media supplemented with 4 g/l glucose and 20 g/l maltose was fed daily with 50% of its calculated glucose requirement, while cultures of the same cells in media containing 4 g/l glucose was fed daily with 100% of its calculated glucose requirement. Duplicate bioreactor cultures were performed for each condition and the growth, biochemical and IgG titer profiles of these cultures were plotted in Fig. 4.
In contrast to the lactate consumption observed in the batch cultures (Fig. 3), there was no lactate consumption in the fed-batch cultures, even in the maltose-supplemented cultures with a 50% glucose feed (Fig. 4C). We postulate that this may be due to the consistent nutrient feeding in the fed-batch cultures, whereas glucose, glutamine or other nutrients were depleted in the batch cultures to result in the observed lactate consumption. Nonetheless, IgG titers of fed-batch cultures (Fig. 4G) were more than 5 fold that obtained from the batch cultures (Fig. 3G), demonstrating that the feeding strategy was successful in improving IgG production as expected of fed-batch cultures.
Comparing between the fed-batch cultures, the VCD, culture viabilities and lactate plots of the maltose-supplemented cultures and Glucose-only #2 culture were similar, while Glucose-only #1 culture had a higher maximum VCD, a faster decrease in culture viability and a faster lactate accumulation (Fig. 4A and C). The faster increase in osmolality in Glucose-only culture #1 (Fig. 4F) is likely due to pH correction as a result of the faster lactate accumulation. These illustrate possible variability of these parameters in the SH87 fed-batch cultures. On the other hand, glucose and glutamine profiles of maltose-supplemented and glucose-only cultures were similar. In addition, IgG titer was fairly consistent between the replicate cultures despite the variability in VCD, lactate and osmolality observed in the glucose-only duplicate cultures.
Comparing the glucose profiles, it was interesting to note that despite being fed only at 50% of its calculated glucose requirement, the maltose-supplemented cultures maintained similar culture glucose concentrations as the glucose-only fed-batch cultures. Nonetheless, because of this reduced glucose feeding, specific glucose consumption of the maltose-supplemented cultures was 0.115 +- 0.007 ng/cell/day, 45% that of the glucose-only cultures at 0.254 +- 0.013 ng/cell/day (Table 2). These suggest that the maltose-supplemented cultures were most probably using a secondary energy source in addition to glucose to achieve comparable growth and culture viability profiles as Glucose-only #2 culture. This secondary energy source is likely to be maltose, because specific glutamine consumption rates were similar between the maltose-supplemented and glucose-only cultures (Table 2), and maltose consumption was observed in the maltose-supplemented cultures from Day 7, one day after glucose feeding was initiated in the maltose supplemented fed-batch cultures (Fig. 4D).
With the maltose supplemented metabolism, we observed that there were 23% and 55% improvements in maximum IgG titers and specific IgG productivities at 1.833 +- 0.124 g/l and 28.8 +- 3.5 pcd, from the 1.483 +- 0.067 g/l and 18.6 +- 4.1 pcd observed in glucose-only fed-batch cultures respectively (Table 2). When compared to Glucose-only #2 culture with a more comparable growth profile which has maximum IgG titers and specific IgG productivities of 1.53 g/l and 21.5 pcd respectively, the improvements in maximum IgG titers and specific IgG productivities were 20% and 34% respectively.
One possible mechanism for the observed improvement in IgG production may be the higher initial osmolality of the maltose-supplemented cultures due to the additional 20 g/l maltose: This may have resulted in the 22% to 40% lower specific growth rates of the maltose-supplemented cultures compared to the glucose-only cultures (Table 2), to possibly allow slower and more productive maltose-supplemented cultures. Nonetheless, when we compared maltose-supplemented batch culture to glucose-only batch culture having similar initial osmolality (Fig. 3G), we noted that an improvement in IgG titer was similarly observed. This suggests that the improvement in maximum IgG titers observed in the maltose-supplemented fed-batch cultures is not only due to osmolality effect: We postulate that a lower availability of glucose, enabled by the presence of maltose, may have resulted in a more efficient cell metabolism in the maltose-supplemented culture, and this may have contributed to the observed higher maximum IgG titers.
To verify whether this lower availability of glucose can have the same effect in the absence of maltose, we compared SH87 glucose-only fed-batch cultures fed with 100% or 50% of their calculated glucose requirements in a separate experiment (Supplementary Fig. 3). While similar maximum VCD were reached in both conditions before glucose feeding was initiated, the culture viabilities of the glucose-only cultures with 50% calculated glucose feed dropped below 50% 4 days earlier than the cultures with 100% calculated glucose feed. Maximum IgG titers of the 50% fed cultures were also only 46.4% that of the 100% fed cultures. These confirmed that the presence of maltose enabled the use of a lower glucose feed to result in the observed higher maximum IgG titers in Fig. 4G.
As glycosylation is a critical attribute of therapeutic IgG products, purified IgG from glucose-only and maltose supplemented cultures from Days 10 and 15 were subjected to glycosylation profiling (Fig. 5). The representative fluorescence chromatograms of Day 10 samples (Fig. 5A) showed that the glycosylation profiles of IgG from both glucose-only and maltose supplemented cultures were similar, suggesting that maltose supplementation did not grossly affect the glycan profiles of the monoclonal antibodies produced. When the relative abundance of glycan structures of the IgG from maltose supplemented cultures were compared to that from glucose-only cultures (Fig. 5B), we noted that there were marginally less fucosylated, sialylated, G1F, G2F and biantennary glycans, and more G0F and mono-antennary glycans. Most of these differences were also observed when glycans from Day 15 samples were compared to that from Day 10 samples, suggesting that maltose supplementation affected glycan profiles in a way that is mostly similar to a later harvest. The exceptions to the similarity are in the relative abundances of the sialylated and high-mannose glycans: while the later Day 15 harvests gave higher levels of high-mannose glycans and similar levels of sialylated glycans compared to Day 10 harvests, maltose supplementation gave lower levels of sialylated glycans and similar levels of high-mannose glycans compared to glucose-only cultures. This data suggests that maltose supplementation can also be used as a means to fine-tune monoclonal antibody glycosylation profile, especially in marginally reducing the sialylation level, which is known to improve antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) of therapeutic antibodies. Additionally, this may also be important in the field of biosimilar manufacturing, where matching of the biosimilar glycan profile to the innovator drug is an important criterion.
