Real-time quantification and supplementation of bioreactor amino acids to prolong culture time and maintain antibody product quality.
Abstract.
Real-time monitoring of cell cultures in bioreactors can enable expedited responses necessary to correct potential batch failure perturbations which may normally go undiscovered until the completion of the batch and result in failure. Currently, analytical technologies are dedicated to real-time monitoring of bioreactor parameters such as pH, dissolved oxygen, and temperature, nutrients such as glucose and glutamine, or metabolites such as lactate. Despite the importance of amino acids as the building blocks of therapeutic protein products, other than glutamine their concentrations are not commonly measured. Here, we present a study into amino acid monitoring, supplementation strategies, and how these techniques may impact the cell growth profiles and product quality. We used preliminary bioreactor runs to establish baselines by determining initial amino acid consumption patterns, the results of which were used to select a pool of amino acids which gets depleted in the bioreactor. These amino acids were combined into blends which were supplemented into bioreactors during a subsequent run, the concentrations of which were monitored using a mass spectrometry based at-line method we developed to quickly assess amino acid concentrations from crude bioreactor media. We found that these blends could prolong culture life, reversing a viable cell density decrease that was leading to batch death. Additionally, we assessed how these strategies might impact protein product quality, such as the glycan profile. The amino acid consumption data were aligned with the final glycan profiles in principal component analysis to identify which amino acids are most closely associated with glycan outcomes.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.
Initially, we ran multiple bioreactors to serve as test runs and establish baseline conditions prior to experimentation with amino acid supplementation strategies (Table 2). One bioreactor was run in batch mode (Feed strategy 1), while four others were run in fed-batch mode using two different sets of glucose and glutamine levels (Feed strategies 2 and 3). Glutamine is an amino acid that is already actively maintained and monitored in standard bioreactor setups, as it is metabolized for energy under high growth conditions where large amounts of proteins are produced. Details on the culture process set points and controls for the runs can be found in the Materials and Methods. Representative glucose and glutamine measurements for these preliminary runs are depicted in Figure 1a,b, and growth profiles in Figure 2a,b.
These bioreactor runs proceeded as expected with glucose and glutamine steadily consumed in the batch mode vessel, while these nutrients were added to the fed-batch vessels when the nutrient concentrations decreased below predetermined thresholds. The fed-batch conditions expectedly prevented significant losses in viable cell density (VCD) or viability, but the batch conditions in Figure 2a resulted in large losses of these cells after 168 hr of culture time. We quantified the nutrient depletion in these cultures and surmised that this is likely a cause for the loss in VCD.
We quantified amino acid levels in these preliminary bioreactor runs to better understand the expected consumption patterns and to formulate amino acid blends to use in the final four bioreactors. To support the addition of amino acid blends during the runs, near-real time analytics were established to allow for rapid quantification of amino acids in the bioreactor vessels. This analytical method for crude bioreactor media was developed with future on-line real-time PAT implementation in mind, which necessitates minimal sample preparation that is fast and avoids derivatization when possible. With our normal phase liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based method, crude media can be collected from the bioreactor, processed in less than 10 min and run on a 15-min gradient for complete amino acid characterization in near-real-time. Only 10 mul is required per replicate, allowing this method to be used for cultures with small working volumes as well, such as microbioreactors. We used the near-real-time measurements while adding amino acid blends to the final four bioreactors to validate the impacts of amino acid spikes on amino acid concentrations, while the less critical time points that were in-between spiking events were collected and analyzed later.
A representative example of the nonderivatized amino acid concentrations measured by mass spectroscopy is displayed in Figure 3. As shown in Figure 3a, the culture concentrations of tyrosine (Tyr) decreased gradually over the full course of the fed-batch mode run. Due to this depletion, tyrosine was picked as an amino acid for supplementation in the final batches. The other amino acids used in the supplementation blends were selected with this reasoning as well: cysteine (Cys), proline (Pro), asparagine (Asn), methionine (Met), histidine (His), tryptophan (Trp), and threonine (Thr). To help us differentiate how each amino acid might potentially affect the culture, they were added in different blends at two times during the bioreactor run (Table 2). The total pool of eight amino acids was divided into two halves and used for the first amino acid supplementation event ((A) Tyr, Cys, Pro, and Asn or (B) Met, His, Trp, and Thr) and occurred between 77 and 127 hr after inoculation. Rather than supplementing amino acids at a predetermined timepoint, we decided to supplement when the conditions of the bioreactors were at a similar growth state. The first amino acid addition event for each bioreactor was timed to occur when the VCD value of the bioreactor had been decreasing for approximately 24 hr (except in the case of Figure 2c, where the amino acid blend was added before this occurred due to the slower growth profile of this bioreactor culture) and the remaining concentrations of the amino acids of interest were determined to be depleted by mass spectrometric analysis. The first addition events are indicated by red arrows in Figure 2c-f. The second amino acid addition occurred between 166 and 221 hr after inoculation and was timed to determine its effect on the growth profiles of the cultures. The second amino acid supplementation used one of three possible combinations: (A + B), (C) Cys and Asn or (D) Tyr and Pro.
Figure 2c-f depicts the VCD during the experimental bioreactor run where four 5 L stainless steel bioreactors were operated with periodic quantification of amino acid concentrations. The specifics for the feeding conditions of these vessels, as well as for the amino acid blends, can be found in Table 2.
As shown in Figure 2c-f, the amino acid blends had markedly different effects on the VCD profiles of the bioreactors. By observing how the VCD changed after the first amino acid addition events (indicated by the red arrows), we can identify large differences in culture responses. For example, while the amino acid supplementation in feed strategies 5 and 7 (Figure 2d,f) appear to have had no effects on VCD growth, there was a dramatic effect on VCD found in feed strategies 4 and 6 (Figure 2c,e). Feed strategies 4 and 6 both used amino acid blend A containing Tyr, Cys, Pro, and Asn as the first addition. This resulted in a sharp increase in VCD growth, as demonstrated by the steepness of the VCD line after the amino acid feeding event. Even more surprisingly when amino acid blend A was added in feed strategy 6 (Figure 2e) and the VCD was already decreasing, the amino acid addition was able to reverse this loss. This indicates that the blend containing Tyr, Cys, Pro, and Asn has the beneficial effect of prolonging bioreactor production time and increasing the VCD. This combination of amino acids, however, did not have any effect when it was added as a second supplementation event (amino acid blend A + B) that occurred 50+ hours after the first amino acid supplementation.
Since past studies have shown that changing the growth conditions of the cells can affect product quality, the next step was to characterize the protein product and determine if any significant changes had occurred. To address this, the final antibody product from these cultures was collected, purified, and analyzed to determine the charge variant profile, size variant profile, and glycan profile.
Charge variant and size variant analysis using microfluidic electrophoretic approaches performed on the product antibody revealed small differences between feeding strategies 4 and 6 (which used amino acid blends A and A + B) and feeding strategies 5 and 7 (which used amino acid blends B, C, and D). Amino acid blend A, which was responsible for the boost in VCD in the bioreactors, also produced a small decrease in basic species (Table 3). Another important distinction for the antibody products produced between by the amino acid blends was the formation of a second peak (labeled as Peak 2 in Tables 4 and 5) during purification that was only observed in cultures supplemented by amino acid blend A. This secondary peak was isolated and analyzed alongside the primary peak for size analysis and glycan analysis. Size variant analysis of the intact mAb product revealed that the products were comparable (Peak 1), while the secondary peak was likely containing some level of contamination (Table 4) as size variant analysis is typically used as a measure of purity. Reduced size variant analysis was performed to get a better understanding of how the light and heavy chains constituting the mAb might have been affected by different amino acid blends during upstream processing (Table 5). The main peak showed no differences due to the amino acid blends as the percentages of light and heavy chain were not changed between feeding strategies. However, the secondary peak for feed strategies 4 and 6 affirmed that the species in this peak were different, with a significantly lower amount of heavy chain than in the main peak and a large amount of unknowns. Altogether, the charge and size variant analyses supported that there were small differences in the charge variant profile that likely would not have a significant effect on the therapeutic properties.
Likewise, the amino acid supplementation strategies had small, but statistically significant, effects on product quality from the standpoint of the glycan profile (Figure 4). The amino acid feeds that resulted in increased VCD and longer batch age performance (Feed strategies 4 and 6) also resulted in higher amounts of high mannose species production and lower amounts of terminal galactosylation (G1F and G2F). The main peaks and secondary peaks had highly similar glycan profiles, so only the main peaks are shown in Figure 4. Collectively, our protein structural analysis illustrates the importance of understanding how process parameters and bioreactor nutrients can affect product quality, as in this case where a favorable increase in VCD performance results in a potentially less favorable glycan profile outcome (with less galactosylation and increased high mannose glycoform amounts).
Due to the impact of amino acid blend supplementation on the glycan profiles of the produced antibodies, we used modeling approaches to better understand how amino acid consumption patterns are correlated to glycan outcomes. Univariate methods alone would not allow us to discover trends in the data that associate amino acid consumption patterns with glycan outcomes, so we employed multivariate approaches. We used batch data from all seven feeding strategies that we performed in this study to increase our statistical power for detecting significant relationships. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to allow us to aggregate a large amount of data across bioreactor runs and determine specifically which amino acids drive the observed changes.
The PCA included both the individual amino acid concentrations and their time-dependent profiles to allow for all data to be considered and analyzed simultaneously, providing greater statistical power relative to a univariate comparison. The PCA model was developed including concentrations of 19 amino acids sampled at nine timepoints (1, 17, 24, 48, 66, 72, 96, 120, 144 hr) from the nine total bioreactor runs (five baseline runs, four experimental amino acid supplementation runs). Due to the differences in amino acid supplementation times, this approach allows us to understand how differences in the amino acid supplementation time might have affected the productivity of the bioreactor in terms of product quality. The first principal component captured 80% of the overall variability in the calibration dataset and 70% in the cross-validation, which suggests that a relatively large amount of variability from the dataset can be captured by the first principal component. Because the aim of the PCA in this study is dimensionality reduction by identifying potentially critical amino acids during manufacturing, the loadings for the first principal component were further examined. The loading represents the impact of an amino acid at a certain time point on the overall variability of the dataset. Shown in Figure 5b, the amino acid time points have been presented in a decreasing order of association with glycan outcome (left to right). Each amino acid data time point features the hour of measurement, so each amino acid also has the same number of time points. Based on the Pareto principal, amino acid time points that have loadings greater than 0.09 are identified to be more important in the overall dataset, with this subset shown in Figure 5a. There are 48 sampling points that have loadings of more than 0.09, containing seven amino acids: Arg, His, Lys, Phe, Pro, Trp, and Tyr. In other words, among the 19 amino acids included in the PCA, the changes of these seven identified amino acids contribute to most of the glycan profile variability.
Figure 6 demonstrates that the loadings of the identified seven amino acids vary over time and that the changes of the loadings are amino acid-dependent. For example, there is a general decline in glycan profile association of all the seven amino acids during the first 24 hr of batch time. Following hour 24, a steady increase of loadings was observed for Arg, His, Lys, Phe, and Pro up to hour 140. Next, the timing of the amino acid supplementation strategy might have an effect on the increase of amino acid correlations with glycan profiles, as most of the amino acid supplementation events occurred between the 80-hr and 120-hr time points, during which the loadings of Arg, Pro, Trp, and Lys were found to steadily increase. Conversely, between hours 100 through 140 the impact of Tyr had a sudden drop and became not significant. The fluctuation observed for the tyrosine dependence for glycan outcome may be a consequence of its supplementation during that timeframe (as part of amino acid blend A). Tyrosine was supplemented at 127 hr and 119 hr in feed strategies 4 and 6, respectively, and the tyrosine correlation to glycan profile dropped during the 120 and 140 time points.
