Multi-Omics Reveals Impact of Cysteine Feed Concentration and Resulting Redox Imbalance on Cellular Energy Metabolism and Specific Productivity in CHO Cell Bioprocessing.
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are currently the primary host cell lines used in biotherapeutic manufacturing of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and other biopharmaceuticals. Cellular energy metabolism and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress are known to greatly impact cell growth, viability, and specific productivity of a biotherapeutic; but the molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. The authors previously employed multi-omics profiling to investigate the impact of a reduction in cysteine (Cys) feed concentration in a fed-batch process and found that disruption of the redox balance led to a substantial decline in cell viability and titer. Here, the multi-omics findings are expanded, and the impact redox imbalance has on ER stress, mitochondrial homeostasis, and lipid metabolism is explored. The reduced Cys feed activates the amino acid response (AAR), increases mitochondrial stress, and initiates gluconeogenesis. Multi-omics analysis reveals that together, ER stress and AAR signaling shift the cellular energy metabolism to rely primarily on anaplerotic reactions, consuming amino acids and producing lactate, to maintain energy generation. Furthermore, the pathways are demonstrated in which this shift in metabolism leads to a substantial decline in specific productivity and altered mAb glycosylation. Through this work, meaningful bioprocess markers and targets for genetic engineering are identified.
Results.
Low Cysteine Feed Concentration Leads to a Decrease in Titer, Specific Productivity, and Product Quality.
5 L bioreactors were used to cultivate DG44 CHO cells for 14 days in a fed-batch bioprocess with daily bolus feeding of nutrients, as described previously. Three separate Cys feed concentrations were utilized in triplicate for a total of nine bioreactor runs. Note that the same collected samples from our previous study were used for the multi-omics analysis in the present paper. In our previous paper, we found that only a 15% reduction in the Cys feed concentration (relative to control) led to a halving of the mAb titer (see Figure 1A). Sampling was conducted just prior to the daily bolus addition (indicated by black arrows in Figure 1A); therefore, the measured abundances for the various 'omics methods represent the lowest intracellular concentrations experienced before the next feeding. Previously, we found depletion of cellular antioxidants, especially GSH, in the low Cys condition, which in turn caused increased oxidative stress and, ultimately, cell death. As the GSH was consumed over the 24 h between the daily bolus feeds, the antioxidants were not depleted, on average, as much for the control and high Cys media conditions compared to the low Cys condition.
As seen in Figure 1B, specific productivity was found to decrease significantly beginning on day 8 in the low Cys condition, ultimately reaching zero specific productivity at the end of the cultivation on day 14. Additionally, product quality of the mAb was affected; specifically, the N-linked glycosylation profile changed where the G0F glycoform, on average, increased for the low Cys feed (Figure 1C).
Relative to the control and high Cys feed conditions, changes in widely used metabolic markers were also observed in the low Cys condition, for example, decrease in the partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2) (50% by day 14, Figure 1D), as well as elevated levels of ammonia (NH4 +) (threefold higher by day 14, Figure 1E) and lactate (fourfold higher by day 14, Figure 1F), all measured extracellularly. The decrease in pCO2 and increase in NH4 + suggest that cells that are fed only 15% less Cys than the control exhibited a significant unfavorable shift in energy metabolism.
Ammonia concentration is known to affect mAb N-glycosylation. We observed no change in RNA expression or protein abundance of the enzyme beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase (B4GALT), which is responsible for attaching the galactose sugar from the UDP-galactose precursor (Figure S1, Supporting Information). Therefore, the change in intracellular pH due to the increased level of ammonia is likely the main driver behind the decreased activity of B4GALT, leading to increased levels of the G0F glycoform of the mAb (Figure 1C), in agreement with the results of others.
We focus below on the unfavorable shift in energy metabolism for the low Cys feed. Our results reveal a collection of multifaceted and interconnected cellular stress responses such as redox imbalance, ER stress, amino acid limitation, and mitochondrial dysfunction when the Cys level was reduced.
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.
Typically, CHO cells used in bioprocessing are genetically engineered to maximize mAb or other biopharmaceutical expression; this high productivity inevitably leads to some ER stress, and the unfolded protein response (UPR) is generally activated by virtue of enhanced protein synthesis and processing in the ER. In this study, in the low Cys fed condition, compared to the control and high Cys feeds, we observed as much as a twofold increase in RNA expression of the endoribonuclease, inositol requiring enzyme-1a (IRE1a), a known marker of ER stress (Figure 2A). This result is in agreement with our previous findings where increased expression of the chaperon protein BiP was observed when the Cys level was limited, indicative of enhanced UPR.
Since we previously found depletion of GSH, a major antioxidant, under the low Cys condition, significant disruption of redox homeostasis can be expected. In particular, decreased levels of GSH can lead to redox imbalance in the ER, affecting the enzymes that control disulfide bond formation, resulting in increased protein misfolding. Cells are known to respond to the increased protein misfolding in the ER by upregulating the oxidative protein folding pathway, which involves two proteins: protein disulfide-isomerase (PDI) that rearranges incorrect disulfide bonds and ER oxidoreductin 1alpha (ERO1alpha) that reoxidizes PDI, while generating H2O2 in the process. Interestingly, as seen in Figure 2B, the level of ERO1alpha abundance was found to be higher in the low Cys condition, relative to the control and high, as early as day 6, indicating that the cells are reacting to the enhanced ER stress caused by the lack of GSH. We also observed increased protein abundance of chaperon proteins, in addition to the previously cited BiP, for example, heat shock protein 90 kDa (GRP94) (see Figure 2C), a further indication of the increased UPR response in the low Cys condition.
The inability to fold proteins properly in the ER will lead to misfolded mAb proteins that need to be degraded to prevent damage to the cells and to recycle the amino acids. In the low Cys condition, relative to the control, we observed evidence of enhanced protein degradation in the form of increased levels of dipeptides. As examples, the time course profile of the dipeptide, valine-leucine is shown in Figure 2D, while other dipeptides can be found in Figure S2, Supporting Information.
Cellular Stress: Amino Acid Response and ER Stress.
As we have shown in our previous paper, when insufficient levels of Cys were fed, the intracellular concentration of this semi-essential amino acid decreased to very low levels until the addition of the next bolus feed. Additionally, amino acid analysis of the supernatant at the end of the feed period showed depletion of Cys in the media (data not shown). Due to the intracellular depletion of Cys, the amino acid response (AAR) was activated, signaling a sense of starvation in the cell. The expressions of the activating transcription factors 3 and 4 (ATF3 and ATF4) are known to be upregulated due to the activation of both the AAR and ER stress. In our experiments, we found steadily increasing levels of RNA expression over the bioprocess cycle for ATF3 in the low Cys condition, relative to the control and high levels (Figure 2E). Interestingly, RNA levels of ATF4 remained similar for all three Cys feed conditions (Figure 2F). The significant increase in ATF3 in Figure 2E points to the increased stress in the low Cys fed CHO cells, relative to the control and high Cys feed, and ultimately to increased apoptosis.
Activation of the AAR and increased ER stress initiates a variety of cellular responses, including gluconeogenesis, growth arrest, autophagy, and apoptosis, as well as decreasing global protein synthesis. All of these responses are detrimental to the specific productivity of the bioprocess (see Figure 1B). In the low Cys fed condition, we observed an increase in the DNA damage-inducible protein (GADD34) (Figure 2G) and expression of the Beclin1 gene (BECN1) (Figure 2H). These trends suggest cellular growth arrest and an increase in autophagy. We next turn to an examination of the effect of ER stress and AAR on the energy metabolism of the cell.
Impact of ER Stress and AAR on Mitochondrial Function.
The TCA cycle within the mitochondria is a cornerstone of cellular energy metabolism as it not only produces precursors to enable the ETC to generate ATP, but the cycle also provides the cell with the flexibility to adapt to environmental changes. As shown in the schematic overview of the energy metabolism pathways in Figure 3, cells typically convert pyruvate, generated from glycolysis, to acetyl-CoA, the latter being the entry point into the mitochondria and the TCA cycle. Increased ER stress and activation of the AAR generates mitochondrial stress, affecting the TCA cycle and thus, the global energy metabolism in the cell. Figure 3i,iv highlight the anaplerotic reactions in which amino acids and protein catabolism replenishes TCA cycle intermediates. A high-level overview of glycolysis is shown in Figure 3ii, while Figure 3iii presents the overall connection between the TCA cycle and lipid metabolism.
Oxaloacetate is an important TCA cycle intermediate whose level can be controlled by two enzymes:pyruvate carboxylase (PC) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2 (PEPCK2). As seen in Figure 3, PC catalyzes the production of oxaloacetate from pyruvate while PEPCK2 removes oxaloacetate from the TCA cycle with conversion to phosphoenolpyruvate. The increase in transcription factor ATF3 (Figure 2E) is known to increase expression of the PCK2 gene encoding for the enzyme PEPCK2. In the low Cys condition, the RNA expression of the PCK2 gene was found to be higher, as early as day 3, compared to the control and high Cys conditions (Figure 4A), leading to increased enzyme abundance of PEPCK2 for the low Cys feed (Figure 4B). This upregulation in protein abundance can increase the removal of oxaloacetate, leading to a reduction in the TCA cycle activity. At the same time, for the low Cys feed, we observed a decrease in RNA expression of the PC enzyme (Figure 4C), resulting in a decrease in PC enzyme abundance (Figure 4D) and likely a reduction in oxaloacetate. As seen in Figure 3, with limited oxaloacetate, the enzyme citrate synthetase (CS) cannot sufficiently use acetyl-CoA to maintain the TCA cycle; this results in lower levels of NADH and FADH2, molecules that are required for ATP generation by the ETC.
With reduction in the TCA cycle, the cell tries to generate the necessary cellular energy by shifting to an alternative anaplerotic pathway to maintain the cycle. The breakdown of glutamine and glutamate to produce alpha-ketoglutarate, an intermediate in the TCA cycle, either through the release of ammonia or through the transaminase reaction producing alanine, are well-known anaplerotic reactions (Figure 3). Evidence for this anaplerotic pathway is seen in the increase in ammonia as the cultivation proceeds (Figure 1E) and intracellular alanine (Ala) (Figure 2I). Furthermore, we detected increased expression of the glutamine transporter SLC1A5 (Figure 2J), a known glutaminolysis indicator.
Cells can also generate alpha-ketoglutarate through a separate pathway in the cytoplasm using citrate by means of IDH1 and ACO1 (NADP+ dependent), as shown in Figure 3. Figure 4E,F present the time course protein abundance profiles for IDH1 and ACO1, respectively. Both enzymes are found to decrease dramatically over time under the low Cys condition, relative to the control and high Cys feed. It appears that the cells fed insufficient levels of Cys were less able to generate alpha-ketoglutarate from citrate and relied heavily on glutaminolysis to replenish the TCA cycle intermediates.
Returning to the removal of oxaloacetate from the TCA cycle, higher levels of phosphoenolpyruvate were found in the low Cys condition, compared to the control and high, signaling gluconeogenesis, as shown in Figure 5B. Additionally, sugars in the polyol pathway, for example, fructose and sorbitol were found to be elevated in the low Cys condition. The time course plot shows significant increases of fructose after day10 (Figure 5D); other related sugars are presented in Figure S4, Supporting Information. Ribose was also found to be higher in the low Cys fed condition resulting from increased gluconeogenesis (Figure 5E). Coupled with the continuous addition of glucose to the bioreactor as a part of the nutrient feeding, gluconeogenesis contributed to elevated levels of pyruvate (along with AAR resulting in lower expression levels of the PC enzyme) for the low Cys condition (Figure 5C). Also seen are increases in other glycolysis intermediates such as 3-phosphoglycerate (3PG) and 2-phosphoglycerate (2PG) (Figure 5A and Figure S3, Supporting Information).
Lipid Metabolism.
Redox imbalance and Cys limitation, as we have pointed out, can enhance oxidative stress and induce autophagy. Due to the importance of lipids in membrane composition as well as energy storage and generation, we investigated changes in the lipidome during bioprocessing to explore the impact of insufficient Cys feeding and resultant redox imbalance on lipid metabolism. Figure 6A presents an overview of the lipid metabolism pathway, demonstrating the breakdown and biosynthesis of glycerophospholipids and glycerolipids. Figure 6B illustrates an example of how a specific phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) with two 18 carbon fatty acid chains and one double bond is degraded. Compared to the control and high Cys conditions, we observed increased glycerophospholipid membrane degradation to lysophospholipids in the low Cys condition. For example, we found higher levels of plasmalogen PE (P-18:1) and lyso-PE (18:1), both of which are breakdown products of glycerophospholipid degradation (Figure 6C,D). As oxidative stress and autophagy persists, the second fatty acid chain can be cleaved from the lysophosphatidylethanolamine and lysophosphatidylcholine leaving only the glycerophosphate groups glycerophosphoethanolamine (GPE) and glycerophosphocholine (GPC). Figure 6E,F show that the intracellular levels of GPE and GPC in the low Cys condition increased dramatically over the bioprocess production time, reaching a level almost 80 times higher than the control condition. This substantial increase in GPE and GPC inside the cell is due to the fact that these products are common for all fatty acid chain lengths and levels of unsaturation.
As cells experience autophagy and increased membrane degradation due to increased oxidative and ER stress along with activation of the AAR, there will be an accumulation of free fatty acids within the cell. Increased levels of these free fatty acids can cause lipotoxicity; therefore, cells will sequester excess fatty acids in neutral triacylglycerols (TG). In our experiments, we observed accumulating levels of TGs over time in the low Cys condition, demonstrating that such cells are actively sequestering a large portion of the released free fatty acids. Figure 6G shows the accumulation over time in the low Cys condition of a specific TG (18:0/18:1/20:0); other triacylglycerol examples can be found in Figure S5, Supporting Information.
TG molecules are stored in lipid droplets (LDs) that are bound by a phospholipid membrane monolayer. The enhancement in TG level is expected to increase the size and number of LDs in the cell. Our results show evidence of LD biogenesis in the form of increased levels of the protein perilipin 2 (PLIN2) in the low Cys condition, a protein known to enhance lipid droplet formation (Figure 6H). Since we observed that the TCA cycle was not generating sufficient energy in the low Cys condition, we expected beta-oxidation of fatty acids to occur to produce ATP and supply cellular energy. However, surprisingly, we found that the cells stored the fatty acids in the form of TGs.
Acylcarnitine is a carrier that facilitates the transport of fatty acids through the inner mitochondrial membrane where beta-oxidation would take place, as illustrated in Figure 6A. We found a lower abundance of the important regulator of mitochondrial beta -oxidation, carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1 (CPT1), the enzyme that catalyzes the production of acylcarnitine, in the low Cys condition, compared to control and high Cys feed (Figure 6I). The reduction in acetylcarnitine during days 7 to 14 of the cultivation (Figure 6J) can be seen to be a result of the reduced abundance of the CPT1 enzyme. Thus, the transport of free fatty acids through the inner mitochondrial membrane was hindered. Additionally, we found reduced protein abundance of long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase (LACS) (Figure S6A, Supporting Information), a protein that activates free fatty acids with the addition of coenzyme A for CPT1 transport into the mitochondria. LACS is regulated by the transcription factor peroxisome proliferator activated receptor PPARgamma, which was also found to be decreased in the low Cys condition (Figure S6B, Supporting Information).
