Fc galactosylation follows consecutive reaction kinetics and enhances immunoglobulin G hexamerization for complement activation.
ABSTRACT.
Fc galactosylation is a critical quality attribute for anti-tumor recombinant immunoglobulin G (IgG)-based monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapeutics with complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) as the mechanism of action. Although the correlation between galactosylation and CDC has been known, the underlying structure-function relationship is unclear. Heterogeneity of the Fc N-glycosylation produced by Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell culture biomanufacturing process leads to variable CDC potency. Here, we derived a kinetic model of galactose transfer reaction in the Golgi apparatus and used this model to determine the correlation between differently galactosylated species from CHO cell culture process. The model was validated by a retrospective data analysis of more than 800 historical samples from small-scale and large-scale CHO cell cultures. Furthermore, using various analytical technologies, we discovered the molecular basis for Fc glycan terminal galactosylation changing the three-dimensional conformation of the Fc, which facilitates the IgG1 hexamerization, thus enhancing C1q avidity and subsequent complement activation. Our study offers insight into the formation of galactosylated species, as well as a novel three-dimensional understanding of the structure-function relationship of terminal galactose to complement activation in mAb therapeutics.
Results.
The Fc glycan distribution of the IgG was measured by applying hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) to enzymatically released glycans. In a typical HILIC chromatogram of CHO-derived mAbs, high mannose (Man5 - Man9), sialylated (G1S1, G2S2 and G2S1) and bisecting N-acetylglucosamine (TriG0) species are present at relatively low levels (<2%). The majority of the Fc glycans belong to three categories: zero (G0), one (G1) and two (G2) terminal galactoses (Figure S1). The galactose transfer reaction (Box in Figure 1a) is the major rate-limiting step during the Fc glycosylation. The extent of mAb A galactosylation were measured with both HILIC released glycan method at the released glycan level and time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS) at the intact protein level. As shown in Figure S2, the intact protein level Fc galactosylation distribution reconstructed by the released glycan data following binominal distribution agrees well with the experimental results of TOF-MS. The results demonstrate the galactose transfer reaction is independent on the glycan structure on the other arm. Based on these observations, we hypothesize that: 1) the galactose transfer reaction in the Golgi apparatus follows consecutive reaction kinetics, and 2) the reaction rate constant of the galactose transfer reaction for G0 is twice that of G1 based on number of reactions sites (Box in Figure 1a). With the hypothesis, the equation of the time dependence of the concentration of each galactosylation species is derived as follows:.
In these equations, the k is the rate constant of the galactosylation reaction, t is the reaction time and [G0]0 is the starting concentration of G0. Using these formulas, we can derive the correlations between the relative abundance of different galactosylated species (see supplemental information for the detailed derivation process).
In this equation, %G0, %G1 and %G2 are the relative abundance of the particular galactosylation species relative to the total number of mAb measured by HILIC. These correlations between various galactosylation species are independent from the rate constant and cultural time, and should apply to any type of CHO cell culture process based on the derivation process. To test this hypothesized correlation, a retrospective analysis on the batch release data of 410 historical drug substance batches manufactured at 12,000 L scale under the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) environment, including six different IgG1s, one IgG4 (Figure 1b and 1c) and the process validation data of 426 historical small-scale cell culture research and development (R&D) samples at 2 L scale, including four different IgG1s and three different IgG4s (Figure S3) were performed. All the IgG1s with various levels of galactosylation under both GMP and R&D environments show good fit with the hypothesized correlations, but the IgG4s show some deviations from the model.
To establish the correlation between the CDC potency and Fc galactosylation, a glycoengineering method was developed to generate IgG galactosylation variants predictively. Compared with the previous method, the new method controls the rate of the reaction with a lower enzyme concentration, manganese concentration, and temperature, and includes a quench step using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) to chelate the manganese cofactor in the solution. The level of Fc galactosylation is well controlled by the reaction time (Figure 2a). A comprehensive library of mAb A galactosylation variants were produced using this glycoengineering method. In addition, a linear correlation was found between the CDC potency and total galactose per heavy chain using this set of galactosylation variants, which aligns well with the previous studies. (Figure 2b).
We further investigated the mechanism by which terminal galactose affects CDC potency. The hypogalactosylated mAb A (mAb A with a low level of galactosylation (>85% G0)) and hypergalactosylated mAb A (mAb A with a high level of galactosylation (>85% G2)) were generated through enzymatic reactions. The CDC potency of these two samples was tested with a cell-based potency assay and the relative binding activity of C1q was evaluated through surface plasma resonance (SPR). The C1q binding activity of hypergalactosylated mAb A was 20% higher than that of the hypogalactosylated mAb A. The relative CDC potency of hypergalactosylated mAb A was approximately double that of the hypogalactosylated mAb A (Figure 3a).
Since the hexamer of IgG1 forms through Fc-Fc interaction on the cell surface, Fc galactosylation may affect hexamer formation by altering the Fc conformation. To probe the Fc conformational change from galactosylation, we analyzed the hypogalactosylated and hypergalactosylated mAb A with hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS). No significant differences in hydrogen/deuterium (H/D) exchange uptake were found in the variable heavy chain, light chain, CH1 and CH3 domains between the two samples, including the C1q binding sites (D270, K322, P329 and P33124,), meaning that the galactosylation does not directly alter the conformation of the C1q binding sites. The only peptide segment with a different H/D exchange uptake between hypogalactosylated and hypergalactosylated mAb (Figure 3b) is peptide 246-257 located in the CH2 domain, which agrees well with the previous study. This specific region was found to be a critical site for hexamer formation (orange cluster in Figure 3c).
To better understand the effect of galactosylation on the Fc conformation, we performed 10  explicit solvent Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation of the Fc with and without the terminal galactose. The simulation results show that the conformations of the Fc domain with and without galactose are dramatically different. The representative conformational structures obtained from a clustering analysis of the combined MD trajectories show that the entire glycan structures are buried within the Fc for hypogalactosylated species whereas glycans extend outside for hypergalactosylated Fc (Figure 3d, Video S1 and S2). The glycans are further apart in the hypergalactosylated species than in the hypogalactosylated species, as observed by the histogram calculation of the distances between center of mass of the two glycans (Figure S4). The hypergalactosylated Fc dimer also has less backbone fluctuation than the hypogalactosylated Fc dimer (Figure S5). These MD results show when the glycans are buried inside the Fc core in the hypogalactosylated Fc dimer, the glycans tend to interact more strongly with each other and that results in a more compact structure. On the other hand, the glycans are extended outside the Fc core in the hypergalactosylated Fc dimer and solvates in water. Glycans are more flexible and spaced further apart.
Diebolder et al. discovered that combining E345R, E430G and S440Y (RGY) mutations stabilizes IgG1 hexamer in solution. The RGY mutant of mAb B, an IgG1 with the same Fc as mAb A was produced to study the terminal galactose impact on the IgG1 hexamer. Native MS shows the existence of monomer, dimer, and hexamer of the RGY mutant of mAb B in solution (Figure S6A). The pentamer was generated from in-source fragmentation of the hexamer during electrospray ionization, which is confirmed by isolation of the hexamer ions (Figure S6B). The RGY mutant was glycoengineered under 40C to prevent thermally induced hexamer dissociation. The native MS spectra (Figure 4a) shows the shifted m/z spectrum resulting from the addition of terminal galactose hypergalactose hexamers are expected to have stronger Fc interaction, which could potentially mask solvent-exposed amino acids with high proton affinities. Compared to the hypo- species, the hypergalactose species was observed with significantly lower charge states, supporting this change in structure.
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was used to analyze the size distribution of both RGY mutants of mAb B and multi-angle light scattering (MALS) was used for peak attribution. All three mAb B mutants were separated into two peaks. (Figure 4b) The MALS characterization results (Figure S7, Table S1) shows the front peak has a molar mass around 900 kDa and the back peak has a molar mass around 150 kDa. The MALS results confirm the front peak is mAb B hexamer and the back peak is mAb B monomer. The overlaid chromatogram (Figure 4b) shows that the hypergalactosylated RGY mutant of mAb B has near twice as much hexamer in free solution as the hypogalactosylated RGY mutant of mAb B. The SEC result and glycan distribution is shown in Table S2. The glycan distribution and native MS data on hexamer show the hypergalactosylated variants are enriched in the hexamer. The HDX-MS results of hypergalactosylated and hypogalactosylated mAb B RGY mutants show the decreased deuterium uptake in the same segment on the CH2 domain in mAb A (Figure 4c), consistent with the mAb A HDX result. This result confirms conformational change induced by Fc galactosylation stabilizes the hexamer. H/D exchange results also demonstrate the hypergalactosylated mutant offered more solvent protection of the CH3 domain 432-446 region (Figure S8A), which is also a critical site in Fc dimer formation (Figure S8B). The characterization results of glycoengineered mAb B RGY mutants proved that the presence of a terminal galactose enhances the IgG hexamer formation for complement activation.
