Generation of FX -/- and Gmds -/- CHOZN host cell lines for the production of afucosylated therapeutic antibodies.
Abstract.
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) is the primary mechanism of actions for several marketed therapeutic antibodies (mAbs) and for many more in clinical trials. The ADCC efficacy is highly dependent on the ability of therapeutic mAbs to recruit effector cells such as natural killer cells, which induce the apoptosis of targeted cells. The recruitment of effector cells by mAbs is negatively affected by fucose modification of N-Glycans on the Fc; thus, utilization of afucosylated mAbs has been a trend for enhanced ADCC therapeutics. Most of afucosylated mAbs in clinical or commercial manufacturing were produced from Fut8-/- Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) host cells, generally generating low yields compared to wildtype CHO host. This study details the generation and characterization of two engineered CHOZN  cell lines, in which the enzyme involved in guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-fucose synthesis, GDP mannose-4,6-dehydratase (Gmds) and GDP-L-fucose synthase (FX), was knocked out. The top host cell lines for each of the knockouts, FX-/- and Gmds-/-, were selected based on growth robustness, bulk MSX selection tolerance, production titer, fucosylation level, and cell stability. We tested the production of two proprietary IgG1 mAbs in the engineered host cells, and found that the titers were comparable to CHOZN  cells. The mAbs generated from either KO cell line exhibited loss of fucose modification, leading to significantly boosted FcgammaRIIIa binding and ADCC effects. Our data demonstrated that both FX-/- and Gmds-/- host cells could replace Fut8-/- CHO cells for clinical manufacturing of antibody therapeutics.
RESULTS.
Generation of FX -/- and Gmds-/- CHOZN host cell lines using CRISPR/Cas9 system.
The CHO cells used in the study are CHOZN  cells from Sigma, which has glutamine synthetase (GS) KO GS-/- genotype, often give higher biologics productivity and are widely used in the industry for clinical cell line development. The genomic sequences of FX and Gmds in CHOZN background were referenced from the published genomic database of CHO-K1 cells (CriGri-PICR, GCF_003668045.1). To generate the KO cells by CRISPR/cas9 systems, three guide RNAs (gRNAs) were designed against first or second exon for each target (Table 1, Figure 1a,d showed genomic schematics). PCR amplification of the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) fragments covering gRNA-targeted genomic loci of the CHOZN cells were sequenced (data not shown), and the targeting sequences were identical to published sequences from CHO-K1 cells. For each target, we also synthesized three single-strand oligonucleotides (ssOligos) that carried a stop codon and were homologous with the genomic loci where gRNAs are against (Table 1b). When cotransfected with gRNAs and Cas9 protein, ssOligos could enhance gene KO efficiency. The CHOZN pools were analyzed after transfection with gRNAs, ssOligos, and Cas9 protein. The cells transfected with a combo of gRNAs FX.1 and ssOligo FX.1 had 70% editing efficiency, a combo of gRNAs FX.2 and ssOligo FX.2 had 40% editing efficiency, and a combo of gRNAs FX.3 and ssOligo FX.3 had 72% editing efficiency. Similarly, the editing efficiency for a combo of gRNAs Gmds.1 and ssOligo Gmds.1 was 80%, and the editing efficiency for a combo of Gmds.3 guide ribonucleic acid (gRNA) and ssOligo Gmds.3 was 84% (Figure 1c,f). Gmds.2 gRNA was not synthesized successfully and dropped for further experiments. We performed single clone development from the pools that have been edited by FX.3 gRNA combo and Gmds.3 gRNA combo (gRNA binding genomic regions shown in Figure 1b,e).
For both Gmds and FX pools, a total of 96 clones were screened with PCR amplification of the gRNA-targeted genomic region followed by next generation sequencing to examine sequence change. Top 12 clones carrying either nonsense deletions or insertions at both alleles (Table 2) for each gene were selected. Western blot results also confirmed that all the FX-/- clones have lost the expression of the protein (Figure 2a), and 11 out of 12 Gmds-/- clones have lost Gmds protein except clone P2A6 (Figure 2c). Lens culinaris agglutinin (LCA) recognizes alpha-mannose glycan on cell surface glycoproteins and exhibits lower affinity to afucosylated glycan and increased affinity to fucosylated glycan. LCA-Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) staining demonstrated that except Gmds-/- clone P2A6, all the 12 FX-/- clones (Figure 2b) and 11 other Gmds-/- clones (Figure 2d) had negative staining, indicative of disruption of the fucosylation pathway in those 23 clones. Clone Gmds-/- P2A6 had a disrupted genotype but stained positive in LCA-FITC, indicating it retains functional Gmds proteins, which could be caused by incorrect sample consolidation and therefore was dropped for further screening. When the 23 clones were cultured in the presence of fucose in medium, the LCA-FITC staining turned to positive (Figure 2b,d), suggesting that the disruption of fucosylation pathway in those 23 clones could be rescued and that is consistent with previous studies that loss of de novo GDP-fucose synthesis in CHO cells can be reversed by the addition of fucose in the medium. 15 ,  19.
Selection of lead FX -/- and Gmds-/- CHOZN host cell lines.
A total of 12 FX-/- clones and 11 Gmds-/- clones have been confirmed based on three lines of data, that is, the genomic nonsense mutations, the loss of expected proteins and the functional disruptions of fucosylation pathway. To test if the KO cell lines are suitable to express afucosylated mAb, we used a proprietary IgG1, mAb1, as the protein of interest to generate bulk pools from each of the 23 host cell lines. Except for one FX-/- clone, P1B10, that did not survive the MSX selection and no pool was generated for that cell line, mAb1 expressing Bulk pools were obtained from the rest of 11 FX-/- clones and 11 Gmds-/- clones. A 14-day fed-batch production was performed from the pools, and their titers were determined by Octet, compared, and ranked (Figure 3b,d). Compared to parental CHOZN cells that led to 0.8 to 1.1 g/L of mAb1 at day14, four FX-/- host clones (P1H3, P2A5, P2E1, and P2F5) and four Gmds-/- host clones (P1A10, P1B10, P2B5, and P2C1) generated similar levels of mAb1 titers ranging from 0.8 to 1.0 g/L.
Next, we performed a glycan profile analysis of mAb1 from the pool production. N-linked Glycans were released by PNGaseF digestion of each mAb1 that was purified via Protein A affinity column. The released glycans were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis (CE) on Gly-Q. In contrast to 86.4%-94.1% of fucosylated glycan from CHOZN cells, only 6.3%-8.1% of fucosylated glycan was observed from the 11 FX-/- clones and 1.0-3.0% from the 11 Gmds-/- clones (Figure 3c,e).
We narrowed down the engineered clones to two top-performing clones for each target based on the data from cell line growth robustness, capability for MSX selection tolerance, cell line long-term stability, production titers, and afucosylation levels of mAb1 generated from the pools (Supplement data). Clone P2A5 was selected as the lead host clone and P2E1 as a backup for FX-/-; Clone P2B5 was the lead for Gmds-/- and P2C1 was the backup. From our data, FX-/- and Gmds-/- CHO clones had robust cell growth, and their production titers were comparable to CHOZN cells. Both KO cell lines have the potential to be utilized for the manufacturing of afucosylated mAbs for clinical use.
mAbs produced from FX -/- hosts carry new glycan modifications.
From the 11 FX-/- hosts, the glycans of the expressed mAb1 were not completely afucosylated. 6%-8% of the glycans were fucosylated and that was too significant to be ignored (Figure 4a, bottom panel). Two unique glycan fraction/peaks with glucose unit (GU) of 9.07 and 10.31, were very close to but not identical to G0F with 9.12 GU and G1F(alpha1,6) with 10.16 GU and G1F(alpha1,3) with 10.37 GU. The unique peaks were not observed in mAb1 from any of the Gmds-/- hosts. To further characterize the unusual glycan peaks in FX-/- hosts, we analyzed the samples with liquid chromatograph/fluorescence/ mass spectrometry technology (LC-FLR-MS). In the LC analysis, the Glycan of 9.07GU had a retention time of 18.03 min, and the Glycan of 10.31GU had a retention time of 22.34 min (Figure 4b). The 18.03 min peak had a mass of 1737.7 Da, and MS/MS fragmentation analysis confirmed its structure HexNAc(3)Hex(4)Fuc (1) (G1F-GlcNAc) (Figure 4c). The 22.34 min peak had a mass of 1895.7 Da and MS/MS fragmentation analysis confirmed its structure HexNAc(3)Hex(5)Fuc (1) (Figure 4d).
mAbs produced from FX -/- and Gmds-/- CHOZN host cell lines demonstrated enhanced FcgammaRIIIa binding and ADCC effects.
41TWe examined the FcgammaRIIIa binding and ADCC effects of a second proprietary monoclonal antibody, mAb2, produced from the two engineered cell lines. We expressed mAb2, an IgG1 with wildtype Fc domain, in the FX-/- P2A5 cells, Gmds-/- P2B5 cells, and CHOZN cells. Consistent with the fucosylation profiles of mAb1, Gly-Q results showed that mAb2 produced from CHOZN is 96% fucosylated. In contrast, mAb2 from FX-/- P2A5 cells is 10.1% fucosylated including 3.4% of G1F-GlcNAc and 3.7% of HexNAc(3)Hex(5)Fuc (1), and mAb2 from Gmds-/- P2B5 is 1.9% fucosylated (Figure 5a,b). mAb2 with these glycan modifications demonstrated no difference in thermal stability by nano differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) and molecular size by size exclusion chromatography (Figure 5c,d).
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) binding assays by Biacore showed that the disassociation constant (Equilibrium dissociation constant [KD]) of mAb2 from CHOZN, FX-/- P2A5, and Gmds-/- P2B5 cells binding to FcgammaRIIIa were 570 nM, 80 nM, and 68 nM, to FcgammaRIa were 0.33 nM, 0.25 nM, and 0.28 nM respectively (Figure 5e). These data suggested that the afucosylated mAb2 produced from both FX-/- and Gmds-/-cells had significant increased binding to FcgammaRIIIa but had no effect on the bindings to FcgammaRIa.
We next examined how ADCC effects were affected by the afucosylated mAb with the increased FcgammaRIIIa bindings. Cells expressing corresponding cell surface antigen for mAb2 were preincubated with serial dilutions of mAb2 followed by exposure to purified human NK cells to induce ADCC-mediated cell lysis. The maximum percentage of cell lysis was 13.5% for mAb2 from CHOZN, in contrast to 27.0% from FX-/- and 25.5% from Gmds-/- cells (Figure 5f). The half-maximum effective concentration (EC50) of mAb2 from CHOZN, FX-/- P2A5 and Gmds-/- P2B5 were 406.5pM, 2.5pM, and 8.0pM (Figure 5d). These data together suggest that the highly afucosylated mAb2 generated from FX-/- and Gmds-/- CHO cells both had much higher ADCC effects (~50-160 fold). The 90% of afucosylated mAb2 from FX-/- and 98% afucosylated mAb2 from Gmds-/- have no significant difference in FcgammaRIIIa bindings and in ADCC effects, which indicated either KO cell line could be used as a master host to produce afucosylated mAbs.
These results also demonstrated that the hybrid glycans, G1F-GlcNAc and HexNAc(3)Hex(5)Fuc (1), found on mAbs expressed from FX-/- CHO cells did not interfere in FcgammaRIIIa binding and ADCC effects. These novel glycans are not distinguished enough to become critical attributes that affect either biophysics or function of therapeutic mAb in vitro.
