Media on-demand: Continuous reconstitution of a chemically defined media directly from solids.
Abstract.
Chemically defined media are reconstituted batchwise and stored in hold tanks until use. To avoid large hold tanks and batchwise production of media, we developed continuous on-demand reconstitutions directly from solids consisting of a hopper and a screw conveyor capable of feeding dry powdered media with the required precision +-5% at low dosing rates of 0.171 g min-1. A commercially available dry powdered cell culture medium was continuously fed over a duration of 12 h into a mixer which was connected to a UV-cell for monitoring and the media were compared to a batchwise production. A comparable amino acid, carbohydrate, and osmolality profile to a batchwise reconstitution could be obtained. Cell cultivation showed comparable performance of batch and continuous reconstitution for two CHO cell lines producing the antibodies adalimumab and trastuzumab on a small and benchtop scale. In-depth analysis of the produced antibodies showed the same glycosylation pattern, other posttranslational profiles such as methionine oxidation and deamidation compared to batchwise reconstitution. Therefore, we conclude a continuous reconstitution of the medium results in the same quality of the product. A continuous on-demand media reconstitution will impact the supply chain and significantly reduce the floor space necessary for preparation and storage.
In this study, we demonstrated a radical strategy for a continuous on-demand reconstitution of a chemically defined media, which provides a solution for shrinking auxiliary buffer and media tanks necessary in continuous biomanufacturing. By using this strategy, we showed comparable performance and product quality of a CHO cell line expressing a monoclonal antibody.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.
Despite the commercial availability of automated media and buffer preparation units, none of these systems solve the shortcomings of being able to reconstitute significant amounts of process materials continuously on-demand at the point of use. Recently, we reported an in-house developed device consisting of a screw conveyor, feeding hopper, and a control unit capable of generating in-situ gradients for chromatographic separations by direct addition of solids (Komuczki et al., ). Thereby, solid buffer components were stored in the hopper for an on-demand point of use generation of highly linear gradients for chromatography. In this study, we adapted the system for a continuous reconstitution of a CDM directly from solids. This continuous on-demand reconstitution of CDM can substantially shrink auxiliary buffer and media tanks needed for continuous upstream production like perfusion systems. Undoubtedly, CDM differ significantly in their powder characteristics and flow behavior from buffer species commonly used in the biopharmaceutical industry simply due to their more complex formulations and manufacturing (Fike et al., ; Salazar, Bleifuss, et al., ). In contrast, most used buffers in the biopharmaceutical industry, are consisting of a few salts (Carredano et al., ). For that reason, we had to adapt our device for the differences in powder flow behavior by redesigning the geometrical shape, power translation, and screw design (Figure 2; Jenike, ; McGlinchey, ). More details on the manufacturing of the device can be found in a previous publication (Komuczki et al., ).
The core unit of our developed system is a 3D printed powder feeder, which continuously feeds DPM in a CSTR having an in- and outflow. We tested the device for accuracy, precision, and stability prior to the continuous reconstitution at different dosing rates. As can be seen from Figure S1, increased rpms decreased the accuracy of the dispensing, however, in the range of our selected dosing rates was below 5%. The error at higher rpms is caused by inhomogeneous 3D fabrication, which leads to friction during the power translation on the screw and therefore reduces the accuracy and precision of the feeding rate. Solving this inhomogeneous 3D fabrication would either require a more sophisticated 3D printer, which would allow a higher printing resolution or a scale-up of the proposed device. We evaluated the continuous on-demand reconstitution for the basal cell culture media Dynamis  AGT  in short- and long-term experiments. The medium reconstituted in short term was used for the spin tube and long term for the bioreactor experiments. The reconstitution of the CDM Dynamis  AGT  requires no additional pH adjustments during the dissolution and therefore no in-line pH-adjustment was integrated in the system. Nevertheless, we think that applying the system to other media requiring pH-adjustment is possible, as in-line pH adjustment has been demonstrated successfully already at an industrial scale. Nevertheless, the system developed described herein is currently limited by not being a fully closed system and without any environmental control, which would be pivotal for an industrial application due to reasons for dust control, the risk of contamination, and potential degradation of components, but it would be out of the scope of the proof of concept (Matheson, ; Salazar, Bleifuss, et al., ; Sheraz et al., ). Monitoring of the degradation of dry powder media components during storage in the hopper could be conducted by colorimetry as recently shown by Dickens et al.. Besides that, closed powder feeding units at a larger scale such as twin-screw conveyors operating in a closed fashion are already commercially available, which would solve the addressed issues.
Short-term reconstitution.
For a first continuous on-demand reconstitution of the CDM, we used a simplified set-up without any on-line monitoring and volume control. We ensured a constant volume in the CSTR (40.6 ml) for a total run time of 2.9 h by visual monitoring of a scale and synchronization of inlet and outlet pumps. Media powder was fed from the top by the device at a dosing rate of 0.202 g min-1 (+-0.02; Figure S1). After a ramp-up phase of 40 min, a continuously reconstituted medium was collected in 40 ml fractions. The lack of a control system for the volume in the CSTR led to a decrease of the volume in the CSTR after 40 min. Consequently, the feed rates of the pumps were manually adjusted to ensure a constant volume. After solving these issues, a relative constant volume (+-6.5%) was achieved. For the biological tests, we pooled the aliquots showing constant osmolality and pH (Figure S2) neglecting aliquots corresponding to the noted process deviations. The pools were sterile filtered and used for the spin tube experiments.
Analysis of the amino acid profiles of the different reconstitution modes indicates an overall slight concentration increase of amino acids (AA) for the continuous on-demand short-term reconstituted medium (Figure 3) in respect to non-essential (NEAA - A) and essential (EAA - B) amino acids. This is most likely due to a minor mismatch of solid feed rate and liquid feed rate resulting in a slightly overconcentrated media. The amino acid distribution is the same for both reconstitution methods and an appropriate control strategy for solid and liquid flow rates will avoid such deviations entirely.
Cell culture performance - Spin tube.
The continuously reconstituted and batch reconstituted media were tested for their biological performance using a CHO-S and a CHO-K1 cell line in spin-tube fed-batch experiments producing different IgGs. Thereby, we evaluated the cell culture performance in terms of growth, metabolites, and productivity. Irrespective of the reconstitution mode of the CDM, both cell lines lead during the fed-batch experiments to a comparable cell culture performance and metabolite profiles (Figure 4). For the CHO-K1 cell line, this resulted in an average maximum viable cell density (MVCD) of 23.50 (+-0.06) x 106 cells mL-1 for the continuous on-demand and 20.25 (+-1.22) x 106 cells mL-1 for the batch medium (Figure 4). However, the CHO-S cell cultures of resulted for the batchwise reconstituted medium in 12.59 (+-0.69) x 106 cells mL-1 and for the continuous on-demand to a 14.25 (+-0.27) x 106 cells mL-1. The CHO-K1 cultures had at the day of harvest still viabilities above 89% and the CHO-S cultures dropped below a viability of 82%, irrespective of the mode of reconstitution. Likewise, glucose was consumed at a similar rate which required bolus addition from Day 4 onwards for both cell lines. The lactate concentration at the day of harvest differed slightly for the CHO-K1 and CHO-S cultures. This slightly higher by-product formation for the on-demand cultures resulted most likely from the marginally higher VCD which was caused by the more concentrated on-demand medium. Correspondingly, analysis of the final titer resulted for the CHO-K1 in 0.27 (+-0.001) g L-1 for the on-demand and 0.22 (+-0.08) g L-1 for the batch cultures. For the CHO-S cultures analysis of the final titer resulted 0.20 (+-0.001) g L-1 (on-demand) and 0.18 (+-0.001) g L-1 (batch), respectively.
As can be seen from Figure S3 (A,B) also the amino acid profiles at the last day of the cultivations show a relatively comparable amino acid profile within essential and non-essential amino acids.
Long-term reconstitution.
As we saw limitations in the stability of the system using manually controlled pumps for the inlet and the outlet of the CSTR in the system, we reevaluated and adapted the system to be operational for a long-term reconstitution. In detail, we build a simple control unit loop that ensured a constant working volume (45 ml) in the mixing vessel and integrated the device into a confinement experiencing slight over-pressure with dry process air to prevent moisture accumulation (Figure 5). A peristaltic pump connected to an Arduino resupplied the stirring vessel with fresh RO-water and one dual-piston pump of the AKTA system set at 6.9 mL min-1 transported the medium through the tubular reactor as illustrated (Figure 1). Dry powdered medium was dosed at 0.171 g min-1. The flow path of the AKTA system was set to by-pass for on-line monitoring of pH, UV, and conductivity.
After a ramp-up phase of 50 min, the continuous on-demand reconstitution entered stable conditions illustrated by the signal measured for the UV, conductivity, and pH (Figure 6). A ramp-up phase of 50 min might be problematic for certain industrial applications. However, by following a fast ramp-up approach achieved by starting with an empty vessel, closing the outlet of the CSTR and normal infeed of liquid and solid, while only starting the operation once the vessel is filled to the volume intended for constant operation, the ramp-up phase can be reasonably reduced to the RT of the CSTR. After 2 and 6 h (Figure 6, black dashed box) arching in the hopper and moisture accumulation, both common phenomena's in the handling of bulk solids, could be observed which lead to a temporary failure of the system (Jenike, ; McGlinchey, ). Insufficient supply of dry process air was likely the cause for the first deviation. However, failure of the sealing of the confinement probably leads to accumulation of moisture and to the second deviation. Nevertheless, manual removal of the arch and increasing the flow of the process air entering the confinement resolved the failure and restored the reconstitution to stable conditions. Thereby, we are able to continuously reconstitute a CDM on-demand for a duration of 12 h. Notably, we observed that powder, which was not properly discharged by the screw, lead to clump formation and inhomogeneous discharge of the powder. Nevertheless, by establishing a closed system while simultaneously monitoring and controlling the dosing accuracy on-line using an integrated scale the error introduced by the clump formation would be resolved. In fact, any fast fluctuation will be sufficiently smoothed out by the CSTR.
The inhomogeneous powder discharge and probably slight fluctuations in the volume of the CSTR with different dissolution kinetics of the individual components are most likely the reason for the fluctuations observed in the stable parts for the conductivity (+-3.27%) and UV signal (+-2.97%). Analysis of the dosing accuracy and precision as a function of weight over the duration of 12 h showed that the device, besides the two deviations, was within the expected accuracy for such small feeding rates (+-5%) with a slightly lower but accurate feeding rate of 0.162 g min-1 in contrast to the anticipated feeding rate of 0.171 g min-1 (-5%; Figure S3). The robustness of the device is further demonstrated over the duration of the feeding of powder by tracking the fed amount of CDM by weight (Figure S4). However, we suggest additionally implementing on-line monitoring of weight and a control loop for the feeding of CDM as well as a control loop for the feeding of liquid into the system. Measurement of the osmolality for the on-demand collected medium during the stable part of the reconstitution resulted in 276 mOsm Kg-1 and 280 mOsm Kg-1. However, analysis of the conventional reconstituted medium resulted in a difference of 7% resulting in 296 mOsm Kg-1 which is undoubtedly caused by the slightly lower feeding rate detected for the continuous reconstitution. Thus, to ensure the same starting conditions we diluted (+7%) the batchwise reconstituted media to the same osmolality using RO water. To highlight any inconsistencies that might arise due to inhomogeneous dissolution of the CDM in comparison to the batchwise reconstitution (e.g., nonuniform amino-acid dissolution leaving one or more components as solids), we analyzed the amino acid composition after the reconstitution and at the day of inoculation of the continuous on-demand reconstituted media (Figure 7A,B).
Notably, an insufficient supply of nutrients could reduce the maximum possible yield, cellular growth, and performance, alter the amino acid sequence of the POI or even trigger metabolic response pathways which ultimately lead to a growth arrest (Altamirano et al., ; Carrillo-Cocom et al., ; Fomina-Yadlin et al., ; Gramer, ; Guo et al., ; Kilberg et al., , ; Popp et al., ; Xing et al., ). As illustrated in Figure 7 the relative abundance (A, B) of the individual amino acids and concentrations at the day of inoculation (C, D) after the continuous on-demand show a comparable profile to a conventional reconstituted media.
Cell culture performance - Bioreactor.
With material pooled from long-term continuous reconstitution, we performed an additional cell culture experiment on a larger scale in controlled bioreactor conditions to study potential differences between the long-term continuous on-demand and batchwise reconstituted medium. For the experiment, we used the CHO-K1 cell line in controlled conditions using DASGIP bioreactors (n = 2). Likewise, to the spin-tube experiments, both approaches of medium reconstitution lead to the same performance (Figure 8). The pooled medium collection (On-demand_1, On-demand_2) of continuous on-demand reconstituted medium lead to an MVCD of 11.53 and 11.32 x 106 cells mL-1 and the cultures grown in batchwise reconstituted medium reached an MVCD of 12.19 and 10.43 x 106 cells mL-1, respectively (Figure 8). Although the overall growth profile was shown to be comparable, we observed a shortened lag-phase for the Batch_1 culture which resulted in a steeper growth during the exponential phase. Nevertheless, the difference at the beginning of the fermentation diminished over the duration of the fermentation.
This is further supported by the viability of the cultures, which lead at the day of the harvest for the On-demand_1 and On-demand_2 cultures to the final viability of 79.80% and 81.40%. However, the Batch_1 and Batch_2 cultures lead to the final viability of 75.50% and 81%, respectively. A similar trend could be observed for the glucose, which was consumed at a comparable rate that required bolus addition from Day 5 onwards for all cell cultures. Equivalent to the glucose profile, a comparable trend of the lactate concentration during the duration of the cultivation could be observed. Furthermore, analysis of the final titer at the day of the harvest also demonstrated comparable productivity of 0.193, 0.239, 0.235, 0.228 g L-1 for On-demand_1, On-demand_2, Batch_1, and Batch_2.
Finally, analysis of the essential and non-essential amino acids at the day of harvest indicated a comparable profile as well (Figure S5).
Product quality.
The product quality and posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of antibodies obtained with batch and on-demand reconstituted media were identically measured using sheathless CE-MS (Figure 9). No additional fragments were observed in the base peak electropherograms (Figure 9). The glycosylation pattern between continuous on-demand and batchwise reconstitution showed only minor differences that are within the expected batch to batch variations for pharmaceutical mAb production (Planinc et al., ; Upton et al., ). Importantly, we did not observe significant differences in the levels of afucosylation (Figure 9). The amount of afucosylation is an important CQA because it leads to a high ADCC activation (Ferrara et al., ; Li et al., ). Regarding other PTMs no differences were observed between the two evaluated conditions.
Summarizing, using the device for a continuous on-demand reconstitution, we were able to continuously prepare medium for 12 h with a reconstitution rate of 0.475 L h-1. By operating at the lower limits of our miniaturized 3D developed device (19 x 9 x 5 cm), we could theoretically supply continuous on-demand fresh medium for a 15 L perfusion bioreactor with a working volume of 10 L operating at 1 VVD. In addition, we believe that a nonintegrated stand-alone version of our developed system similar to already existing automated buffer preparation units could also substantially contribute to the reduction of preparation and storage costs of cell culture media (Carredano et al., ; Gibson et al., ). The trend of outsourcing media and buffer preparation increased in the last decade, and we believe that an on-demand reconstitution directly from solids would position itself on the biotherapeutic manufacturing and supplier of process materials side and by that reduce the logistical pressure (Langer, ). As the developed device is also easily scalable, we offer a flexible solution for large scale media preparation but also to make continuous processes such as the perfusion technology more easily available for existing fed-batch facilities (Lin et al., ); thus, extending the continuous idea into the auxiliary equipment's of buffer and media preparation (Figure 10).
Furthermore, by following an ICB approach for media reconstitution a new "playground" for media and process development will emerge, considering that the nutrient demand during the growth and production phase (steady-state) significantly differs (Altamirano et al., ; Chen et al., ; Kaisermayer et al., ; Sieck et al., ; Vijayasankaran et al., ). By that current solubility and stability issues might be overcome, which could potentially lead to superior decoupled medium formulations for continuous bioprocessing (Salazar, Keusgen, et al., ). Also, the development of feeding strategies for perfusion technology such as a gradual increase in nutrients by applying a "specific DPM feeding rate" could introduce new concepts for process control and consequently reduce oscillations in the RT of ICB (Sencar et al., ). Thus, a fully automated continuous on-demand media preparation will contribute to the reduction of floor space, further process intensification but also to flexibility for media development and feeding strategies.
