Continuous Feeding Reduces the Generation of Metabolic Byproducts and Increases Antibodies Expression in Chinese Hamster Ovary-K1 Cells.
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are the most important host system used for monoclonal antibody (mAb) expression. Moreover, the fed-batch culture mode is the most widely used method to increase mAb expression in CHO cells by increasing the amount of feed. However, a high amount of culture feed results in the production of metabolic byproducts. In this work, we used a continuous feeding strategy to reduce metabolic byproducts and improve mouse-human chimeric anti-epidermal growth factor receptor vIII (EGFRvIII) antibody C12 expression in Chinese hamster ovary-K1 cells. Moreover, the effects of the feeding strategy on the cell culture and monoclonal antibody production were evaluated in chemically defined suspension cultures of recombinant CHO-K1 cells. Compared with bolus feeding methods, the continuous feeding method did not have any advantages when the feeding amount was low, but with a high feeding amount, the continuous feeding method significantly reduced the concentrations of lactate and NH4+ in the later culture stage. At the end of the culture stage, compared with bolus feeding methods, the lactate and NH4+ concentrations under the continuous feeding mode were reduced by approximately 45% and 80%, respectively. In addition, the antibody C12 expression level was also increased by almost 10%. Compared to the bolus feeding method, the antibody C12 produced by the continuous feeding method had a lower content of high-mannose glycoforms. Further analysis found that the osmolality of the continuous feeding method was lower than that of the typical fed-batch bolus feeding method. Conclusively, these results indicate that the continuous feeding method is very useful for reducing metabolic byproducts and achieving higher levels of mAb production.
3. Results and Discussion.
To study the effects of feeding strategies on CHO cell growth and C12 production, fed-batch cultures were initiated at a cell concentration of 0.5 x 106 cells/mL in 7 L bioreactors, as shown in Table 1. These experiments were performed on two cell lines, and to better analyze the impact of the feeding methods, three feeding methods were evaluated: feeding once every two days, feeding once a day, and continuous feeding. Moreover, each of the three feeding methods further consisted of three different feeding amounts, as shown in Table 1.
3.1. Effects of Three Different Feeding Processes on CHO Cell Growth.
The data of the three different feeding processes with the same feeding amount were compared (Figure 1). At a low feeding amount (Figure 1a,d), there were no significant difference in cell growth for both cell lines A and B among the three different feeding methods; these may be because the CHO cells did not produce many metabolic byproducts when the feeding amount was low, so the cell growth was similar under the three feeding methods. At a medium and high feeding amount(Figure 1b,c,e,f), for cell line A, continuous feeding showed better growth, a higher peak VCD and increased viability maintenance. According to our limited knowledge, this is the first report that the continuous feeding process can increase the maximum viable cell density. These results may be related to the effect of nutrient levels and osmolality on the cell growth cycle. However, this result did not reproduce on cell line B.
When feeding was performed every two days or daily, a high feeding amount resulted in a lower VCD and viability in the late cultivation time period. This result may be due to greater dilution and metabolic by-products caused by higher feed amount. Within the scope of our research, we did not find that the continuous feeding process with a high feeding amount has a lower late-cultivation viability, which indicates that the continuous feeding process increases the threshold of feeding amount that the process can tolerate.
3.2. Effects of Feeding Strategies on Cell Metabolism.
It is often necessary to increase the amount of feeding to obtain a higher yield when using the fed-batch culture process, but high feeding may lead to an increase in lactate, NH4+, and osmolality, which are the key byproducts of CHO cell metabolim. For lactate-depleting CHO cells, lactate is usually produced first and then consumed. For CHO cells with the GS system, NH4+ levels is accumulated slowly in the later stages. As shown in Figure 2, under high feeding conditions, continuous feeding produced lower levels of lactate, NH4+, and osmolality at the late stage of the culture. The reason is possibly that traditional bolus feeding methods can introduce high concentrations of nutrients within a short period of time, which will ultimately induce more metabolic byproducts. In addition, after feeding, the osmolality will rise rapidly and greatly, and such a high osmolality will also induce cells to produce more metabolic byproduct. The continuous feeding process can control the concentration of nutrients in the bioreactor in an appropriate range, so it can reduce the production of metabolic byproducts such as lactate. Previously, it was reported that a high concentration of lactate, NH4+, or osmolality would affect the maintenance of cell viability and the expression of antibodies. The continuous feeding process has lower metabolic byproduct generation, which may be the reason for the higher VCD and viability at the late stage of the culture when using the continuous feeding process.
To verify our speculation that continuous feeding can lower the level of nutrients in the culture system, the residual amino acid levels of different processes under three high feeding amounts were tested and analyzed with cell line A and B. The residual amino acid concentrations were added to obtain the total amino acid concentration, as shown in Figure 3b,c. For cell line A, the total residual amino acid concentration in the continuous feeding process was the lowest, which was only 80% of daily feeding and feeding once every two days. This may have contributed to cell line A producing lower lactate and NH4+ levels when using a continuous feeding process. The lower amino acid concentration would further reduce the osmolality of the culture environment (Figure 2e,f). Low osmolality and substrate concentration would further reduce the production of metabolic byproducts (lactate and NH4+). The continuous feeding process introduced lower concentrations of aspartic acid (Asp), glutamate (Glu), serine (Ser), threonine (Thr), proline (Pro), valine (Val), isoleucine (Ile), leucine (Leu), lysine (Lys), and the sum of cysteine and cystine (Cys) at the end of the cultivation, but the glutamine (Gln) concentration was higher, and there are no obvious difference in other amino acids (Figure 3a). The low substrate concentration reduced the rate of lactate and NH4+ generation, so as to maintain a higher cell viability. At the same time, higher cell viability can synthesize the Gln enzyme more efficiently; therefore, more NH4+ and Glu can be synthesized into Gln. This is also consistent with the higher Gln levels in the supernatant of the continuous feeding process.
The single-cell amino acid consumption rate of cell line A was further analyzed (Figure 3d), and there was no significant difference between different feeding processes. However, the continuous feeding process obtained a higher VCD, which consumes more amino acids, so the residual amino acid concentration will be lower. The cell line B has no obvious difference in VCD between different feeding processes, so there is no significant difference in total residual amino acid concentration between different feeding processes.
These results indicate that the continuous feeding process cannot increase the amino acid consumption rate of single cells. As to whether the residual amino acid concentration can be reduced is related to the cell density, and the continuous feeding process may not necessarily reduce the residual amino acid concentration. Combined with Figure 2e,f, the results show that compared with continuous feeding, traditional bolus feeding has higher amounts of metabolic by-products, which may be because bolus feeding can increase osmolality and nutrient concentration to a high level in a short time after feeding, which induces higher amounts of metabolic by-products.
3.3. Effects of Feeding Strategies on Antibody Expression and Quality.
The yields of all processes at the end of culture are shown in Figure 4. For cell line A, the yield of feeding once every two days process and the daily feeding process showed an increasing trend first, followed by a decline as the feeding amount increased. However, the yield of the continuous feeding process was always rising as the feeding amount increased. With the low feeding amount, there were no differences in the yield between the three kinds of feeding processes. With the medium feeding amount, the yield of feeding once every two days process was the lowest, and there was no difference between the daily feeding and continuous feeding processes. With the high feeding amount, the continuous feeding process obtained the highest yield, exceeding 10 g/L, and the feeding once every two days process obtained the lowest yield, at 8.56 g/L. For cell line B, the experimental results were similar to cell line A, the continuous feeding process obtained the highest yield, exceeding 4.0 g/L.
Although the easiest way to increase antibody expression is to increase the amount of feed, this strategy will quickly reach the threshold for the traditional bolus feeding process because of lacate, NH4+, or osmolality. However, the continuous feeding process can further increase the threshold of the feeding amount, which will further increase antibody expression.
Further analysis of the specific production rates (Qp) obtained by the different processes (Figure 5. For cell line B, there was no significant difference in the Qp between different processes (p > 0.05). However, for cell line A, the Qp of continuous feeding was lower than that of the other processes (p < 0.05), mainly due to the lower nutrient concentration obtained by continuous feeding. It may also be related to the cell growth cycle, and we assume that the continuous feeding process may obtain a lower G0/G1 ratio. Therefore, we believe that the Qp of continuous feeding process has the possibility of further improvement.
The antibodies of the three processes with high feeding amounts for cell lines A and B were purified by protein A in one step, and the antibodies were used to quality analysis.
IgG antibodies produced in CHO cells generally contain low levels of high-mannose glycoforms (Man5-9), typically below 5%, with the most common glycans being the complex glycoforms G0F, G1F, and G2F. High levels of high mannose glycoforms on therapeutic antibodies could be a concern due to uncertainty about their impact on clearance, immunogenicity and efficacy. Therefore, we need to control the high-mannose glycoform content of antibodies. Antibodies charge variants may have a significant impact on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the antibody; therefore, it needs to be strictly controlled.
By testing the quality of the antibodies obtained from the three processes, we found that the high-mannose glycoform level of the continuous feeding processes was decreased (p < 0.05) (Table 2 and Table 3). Pacis et al. reported that a high osmolality level could increase the high-mannose glycoform content. Since continuous feeding processes have a lower osmolality level (as shown in Figure 2), this may explain why the continuous feeding process had a decreased high-mannose glycoform content. There was no significant difference in the other quality attributes.
Currently, the biopharmaceutical industry is developing rapidly; however, due to the low expression of mammalian cells and the high drug dosages used by patients, the production capacity and production costs of biopharmaceuticals have come to reprsent a significant bottleneck for the popularity of biopharmaceuticals. Therefore, it is very important to improve the expression ability of mammalian cells and reduce the production cost of biological drugs. Currently, the most widely used mammalian cell type for biopharmaceutical production is CHO cells, and the most popular CHO cell culture process is the fed-batch process because the fed-batch process has the advantages of low production cost, simple operation, and stable processes. However, the fed-batch process also has the disadvantages of low production efficiency and easy accumulation of metabolic byproducts in the later stages of the culture. The accumulation of metabolic byproducts in the later culture stages may reduce the efficiency of protein production and cause process instability. To improve the production efficiency of the fed-batch culture process, the simplest method is to increase the feeding amount, but increasing the feeding amount will bring more metabolic byproducts, which may prevent the increase of antibody expression. Therefore, solving the high metabolic byproduct caused by the high feeding amount may further improve the protein expression ability of CHO cells.
In our experiments, the results showed that changing the feeding methods may reduce the concentration of high metabolic byproducts brought by high feeding amounts. Therefore, to investigate the effect of the feeding strategy on the CHO cell culture and antibody quality more comprehensively, a comparative studies were conducted on two cell lines and three different feeding levels. The experimental results showed that at low feeding levels, there was no significant difference between the three different feeding processes, and the gap between the three feeding processes slowly emerged as the amount of feeding increased. For cell line A, the continuous feeding process can obtain a higher peak VCD and yield with a high feeding amount. However, for cell line B, there was no significant difference in the peak VCD obtained under different feeding processes, but continuous feeding could maintain a higher peak VCD and viability at the end of culture, such that the final antibody expression of the continuous feeding process was 5~15% higher than that of the next-day feeding and daily feeding processes. These results indicate that the continuous feeding process can better maintain cell viability at the later stage of culture than the other feeding processes.
Both cell lines A and B results showed that continuous feeding can reduce the levels of lactate and NH4+ significantly in the late cultivation period. Detecting and analyzing of amino acids in the supernatant of the three culture processes of cell line A and B, the results showed that the concentration of residual free amino acids before feeding is not the cause of more metabolic by-products. Compared with continuous feeding, traditional bolus feeding has higher metabolic by-products, which may be due to bolus feeding can increased osmolality and nutrient concentration to a high level in a short time after feeding which inducing more metabolic by-products. A lower amino acid substrate concentration would reduce the energy supply of amino acids through oxidation, thereby reducing the rate of NH4+ and lactate production.. The continuous feeding process obtained a lower osmolality, which caused a lower high-mannose glycoform content in the antibodies, so the continuous feeding process improved the quality of the antibodies. Thus, there were no significant differences in other quality attributes between the three kinds of fed-batch processes.
