Engineering death resistance in CHO cells for improved perfusion culture.
ABSTRACT.
The reliable and cost-efficient manufacturing of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) is essential to fulfil their ever-growing demand. Cell death in bioreactors reduces productivity and product quality, and is largely attributed to apoptosis. In perfusion bioreactors, this leads to the necessity of a bleed stream, which negatively affects the overall process economy. To combat this limitation, death-resistant Chinese hamster ovary cell lines were developed by simultaneously knocking out the apoptosis effector proteins Bak1, Bax, and Bok with CRISPR technology. These cell lines were cultured in fed-batch and perfusion bioreactors and compared to an unmodified control cell line. In fed-batch, the death-resistant cell lines showed higher cell densities and longer culture durations, lasting nearly a month under standard culture conditions. In perfusion, the death-resistant cell lines showed slower drops in viability and displayed an arrest in cell division after which cell size increased instead. Pertinently, the death-resistant cell lines demonstrated the ability to be cultured for several weeks without bleed, and achieved similar volumetric productivities at lower cell densities than that of the control cell line. Perfusion culture reduced fragmentation of the mAb produced, and the death-resistant cell lines showed increased glycosylation in the light chain in both bioreactor modes. These data demonstrate that rationally engineered death-resistant cell lines are ideal for mAb production in perfusion culture, negating the need to bleed the bioreactor whilst maintaining product quantity and quality.
Results.
Fed-batch.
A total of five 1 L bioreactors (600 mL working volume) with 2 different cell lines, one DR ('DR1') and one control ('X') cell line were run in fed-batch mode. Runs were split up into run 1 (DR1-1 and X-1) and batch 2 (DR1-2, DR1-3, and X-2) and are displayed separately. Differences between DR and control cell lines were consistent between batches.
Viable cell density (VCD), viability, and cell size are displayed in Figure 1. The DR1 cell line achieved higher maximum cell densities of 15 and 18 x 106 cells/mL compared to 11 and 15 x 106 cells/mL in batches 1 and 2, respectively. For all fed-batch bioreactors, the average viable cell size increased from 15 to 19.5 microm from the beginning of the run to the point of viability crash, which was day 14 for control cultures and day 23 for DR1 cultures. After this point, viable cell diameters decreased until the harvesting viabilities of less than 85% was reached. These harvest viabilities were reached on day 19 for the control cultures and on day 26 or 27 for DR1 cell cultures.
Similar trends with consistent, small differences were observed between cell lines when comparing osmolarity and the key inhibitory metabolites lactate and ammonia (Figure 2). Lactate levels in all cultures increased to up to 25 mM within the first 6 days before cells switched to lactate consumption. Lactate levels in DR1 cultures were approximately 3 mM lower than the control, and lactate levels rose again gradually after the consumption period. In control cultures, lactate reached 6 mM prior to the termination of the run. However, the extended duration of DR1 cultures saw lactate concentrations reach 25 mM in an exponential manner. Ammonia and osmolarity increased steadily throughout the runs, but remained relatively constant during the lactate consumption period. DR1 cultures showed an average of 1 mM higher ammonium concentration and 30 mOsm lower osmolarities compared to control cultures during comparable periods. The control cultures' final ammonia and osmolarity levelswere approximately 5 mM and 500 mOsm, respectively. Due to the extended culture durations of DR1 cell lines, these levels were much higher, at 10-15 mM and 610 mOsm, respectively. This change is pronounced enough to suggest a second metabolic switch was activated exclusively in DR cell lines, most likely due to the culture conditions at this time point.
Antibody titers for the control cell line increased up to day 18 before slightly dropping on the last day of culture when viability dropped below 85%. For DR1 cultures, titers peaked around day 21 and then continuously decreased (Figure 3), despite viabilities of over 90% at the beginning of this period (Figure 2). In particular, for X-2, an increase in titer for the control compared to the DR cell line was observed. The cell-specific productivity qp was calculated as the slope of the product titer plotted against the integrated viable cell density (IVCD) and averaged for DR1 (n = 3) and X (n = 2). Over comparable periods, the control cell line tended to have higher specific productivities than DR1 cultures. The same holds true when considering the biomass-specific productivity. The drop in titer from day 21 onwards in DR1 does partially explain the significantly lower qp as it was calculated over the entire duration of the culture.
Perfusion.
Three cell lines were each run once in perfusion culture. These included the aforementioned DR1 and X cell lines, along with another DR cell line from the same cloning process; DR2. Each perfusion run lasted between 27 and 32 days with a steady-state at approximately 65 x 106 cells/mL for 8 days.
VCD, viability, cell diameter, and the bleed rate are shown in Figure 4. As indicated by the VCD, a 'steady state' was reached after 10 days for all cultures. DR1 grew beyond the intended cell density in the initial phase due to an unexpected decline in cell diameter, which was not detected by the capacitance-based biomass probe, requiring manual bleed control. The bleed rate necessary to maintain a stable cell density between days 10 and 18 varied substantially between runs. Values between 11% and 18% were seen for the control cell line. DR1 showed a high of 12% bleed before gradually decreasing for the remaining time of 'steady state' operation. DR2, did not trigger any bleed as cell densities remained at or below 65 x 106 cells/mL for the full run. The main difference between the DR and control cell lines was that the control cell line increased in VCD to 95 x 106 cells/mL after bleeding, before decreasing in number and viability. Conversely, the DR cell lines did not show any further growth, but increased in cell diameter by up to 2 microm more than the control. The DR cultures also did not crash after the bleed was halted, with DR1 remaining over 92% viability and DR over 96%.
One of the main advantages of perfusion over fed-batch cultures is the constant removal of inhibitory by-products. This was confirmed here by comparing the main inhibitors, lactate, and ammonia (Figure 5), against the values observed in fed-batch mode (Figure 2). Even though similarly high lactate values of up to 27 mM were observed in the initial phase, lactate concentrations stayed below 5 mM in perfusion, despite much higher VCDs. DR2 and X showed a minor increase toward the culture end, coinciding with a decrease in viability for the latter. The perfusion process also reduced ammonium concentrations to consistently half the values seen in fed-batch. Similar to fed-batch, DR cell lines also had approximately 1 mM higher ammonium concentrations than controls. Osmolarities did not differ between cell lines, dropping sharply after day 5 (two days after starting perfusion) to remain consistently under 300 mOsm. Besides the low osmolarity observed, we concluded that the DR culture was not amino acid limited. Cell line specific differences in amino acid consumption patterns were observed, but only asparagine was completely consumed. Asparagine has been classified as not growth limiting (Supplementary material Figure 1).
The antibody titer was monitored in the reactor supernatant and permeate stream throughout the runs (Supplementary material Figure 2). Cell-specific productivity qp and biomass-specific productivity qp,biomass were calculated for cultures during and after a capacitance probe-controlled bleed, designated as phase I and phase II, respectively (Figure 6).
Interestingly, the average titers of all cell lines were mostly comparable during both phases. The similar VCD profiles thus yielded consistent qp in phase I for all cell lines, and between phase I and phase II for DR cell lines that experienced growth arrest. The growth of the control cell line in phase II without a corresponding increase in titer, however, decreased qp during this period. The observations hold true when the increase in cell diameter is taken in consideration. Again, the biomass-specific productivity is comparable across cultures during phase 1, but decreases more significantly for the control culture in phase 2.
Product quality.
Aiming to assess the effects of the DR knockouts on the product quality, protein A purified supernatant samples from fed-batch cultures on days 19 (end of control culture) and 26 (end of DR1 cultures) were analyzed. Samples were run in reduced and non-reduced forms using capillary gel-electrophoresis (Figure 7). Following the same principles of standard SDS-gel electrophoresis, the capillary setup allows for more reproducible quantification. Regarding perfusion cultures, supernatant and permeate samples on day 17 (end of steady-state) and the end of the run were analyzed. Additional samples from the perfusion control culture (X) on day 28 (i.e., prior to the decline in viability) were included. As no significant, time-dependent differences within clones were observed (Supplementary Table 1 and Table 2), samples were pooled according to cell lines. Additionally, samples for the control cell lines on days 28 and 32 did not differ and were similarly pooled together.
Overall, similar glycosylation patterns of heavy and light chains were observed (Figure 7, top left and right). However, comparing the light chain's glycosylation in fed-batch between harvest on day 19 (X) and on day 26 (DR), an increase in glycosylation of 54% was observed for the apoptosis-resistant cell line. A similar increase on average of 31% was seen in perfusion cultures.
The observed glycosylation of the light chain, even though uncommon for pharmaceutical mAbs, is to be expected for m104.2. Running the m104.2 produced under standard conditions did yield a similar pattern (Supplementary material Figure 3). However, the data was not included in the graph presented above, as differences in media, culture duration, and feeding regime do not allow a reliable comparison.
These differences in the light chain's glycosylation were confirmed when samples were run in non-reduced form (Figure 7, bottom left and right). An increase of the fully expressed antibody with glycosylated light chain compared to the non-glycosylated light chain was seen independent from the DR cell line's culture mode compared to the control. Additionally, a clear reduction of mAb fragmentation in perfusion cultures was observed.
Aiming to reveal the potential impact of changing glycosylation patterns on antibody binding, association (ka) and dissociation constant (kd) were evaluated using a Biacore T800. No significant difference between cell lines and culture modes was observed, with a kd of 7.01 x 10- +- 1.87*10- ms- and ka of 9.10 x 104 +- 0.71 x 104 s-1 across samples (Supplementary material Figure 4).
Additionally, glycans present were analyzed in their structure using mass spectrometry. Glycans discovered were compared to the standard for which glycans were confirmed previously by an external provider (Table 1). With the exception of DR1-1 and X-1, the same glycans identified in the standard were identified in all other fractions. Notably, all missing glycans are located on the light chain. Further, DR1-1 day 19 did not show data for the light chain at all, indicating that glycans missing might be a result of the mass spectrometry analysis, rather than the product itself.
