Integrated continuous biomanufacturing on pilot scale for acid-sensitive monoclonal antibodies.
Abstract.
In this study, we demonstrated the first, to our knowledge, integrated continuous bioprocess (ICB) designed for the production of acid-sensitive monoclonal antibodies, prone to aggregate at low pH, on pilot scale. A high cell density perfusion culture, stably maintained at 100 x 106 cells/ml, was integrated with the downstream process, consisting of a capture step with the recently developed Protein A ligand, ZCa; a solvent/detergent-based virus inactivation; and two ion-exchange chromatography steps. The use of a mild pH in the downstream process makes this ICB suitable for the purification of acid-sensitive monoclonal antibodies. Integration and automation of the downstream process were achieved using the Orbit software, and the same equipment and control system were used in initial small-scale trials and the pilot-scale downstream process. High recovery yields of around 90% and a productivity close to 1 g purified antibody/L/day were achieved, with a stable glycosylation pattern and efficient removal of impurities, such as host cell proteins and DNA. Finally, negligible levels of antibody aggregates were detected owing to the mild conditions used throughout the process. The present work paves the way for future industrial-scale integrated continuous biomanufacturing of all types of antibodies, regardless of acid stability.
A high cell density perfusion process, performed at pilot scale in 30 L bioreactor, was integrated with a continuous purification process including a Protein A capture using ZCa ligand with mild pH elution, a solvent/detergent-based virus inactivation and two polishing steps, cation and anion exchange. This completely automated process generated purified antibody at very high yield with no detectable aggregation.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.
Upstream process.
A small-scale perfusion process with 0.2 L working volume integrated with a downstream process was performed to demonstrate the technical feasibility for long-term operation of the novel ICB before pilot-scale testing. The production process was operated in two stages; Stage 1 targeting to rapidly bring the cell density to 100 x 106 cells/ml and Stage 2 aiming at maintenance of the system in a steady state at this cell density with high mAb productivity and low medium renewal. The N-1 process was designed to rapidly increase the density of healthy cells and provide a high cell concentration into the production bioreactor to shorten the growth phase in the latter. The combination of selected perfusion rate and proportion of feed concentrates in the medium attempted to minimize the medium renewal while optimizing the cell growth during the cell expansion phases and the mAb productivity during the steady-state production phase.
A common issue for the design of perfusion processes is the high glucose concentration of commercial media and feed concentrates, which can lead to the formation of high lactate concentration in the culture (Y. Zhang et al., ). We have previously presented a targeted feeding strategy denoted TAFE (L. Zhang et al., ), in which a target cell-specific consumption rate (q_glc target) is selected by the operator, and from which the glucose concentration in the fed medium (including additives) is determined. Based on preliminary experiments it was observed that a strictly controlled sugar consumption with a q_glc target of   1.1 pmol/(cell*day) enabled a low lactate formation while ensuring high mAb productivity and satisfying quality attributes.
For the seed bioreactor, the selection of a CSPR with 33 pl/(cell*day) using HA medium, which contains 33 mM glucose, allowed a q_glc target of 1.1 pmol/(cell*day) according to the TAFE design. It was observed that HA medium could well support the cell expansion at a CSPR of 33 pl/(cell*day) up to 70 x 106 cells/ml. However, the culture performance would be reduced at CSPR < 33 pl/(cell*day) unless reinforcement such as Cell Boost supplementation was carried out. In the production bioreactor, supplementation of the feed concentrates Cell Boost 7a and 7b was adopted since this medium reinforcement allowed to reduce the CSPR. HA + 7a/3 + 7b/1, which included 45 mM glucose, supported fast cell growth in the small-scale trials, and was therefore selected for Phase 1. A CSPR of 25 pl/(cell*day) was compatible with q_glc target of 1.1 pmol/(cell*day) considering a glucose concentration of 45 mM. During Phase 2 at steady-state, priority was given to reduce the CSPR and growth rate, while maintaining the cell-specific mAb productivity. Therefore, the CSPR was decreased to 15 pl/(cell*day) while a medium reinforcement was applied by increasing the Cell Boost 7a concentration. Using HA + 7a/6 + 7b/1, glucose was additionally supplemented to achieve a final concentration of 73 mM according to the TAFE design with a q_glc target of 1.1 pmol/(cell*day). The present strategy for the selection of the media/feeds and glucose concentrations, including a TAFE approach, successfully generated a stable cell-specific glucose consumption, and allowed stable operation of the perfusion process with minimized cell-specific productivity of lactate (Supporting Information: Figure S4). A higher q_glc was obtained during the first 1-2 days of the processes, resulting from excessive glucose in the batch medium HA. The strategy for the medium selection applied in the present work is summarized in Table S2.
The results of the perfusion cultures are shown in Figure 2. Successful scale-up was achieved with a 150-fold increase in the bioreactor working volume and perfusion flow despite differences in the cell retention systems, geometrical parameters of the bioreactors and aeration strategy. On both scales, high cell density cultures with 100 x 106 cells/ml were maintained with high viability (>94%) (Figure 2a). The production bioreactors were inoculated from high cell density seed bioreactors operated in perfusion mode, which considerably shortened the cell expansion phase in the N-stage bioreactors. As a result, the production process rapidly achieved the target cell density 4-5 days after inoculation. The production process was run for 20 and 25 days on pilot and small scale, respectively. When the cell density reached 100 x 106 cells/ml, continuous cell bleeding was initiated with 0.1-0.3 vvd (representing 6.7%-20% of perfusion flow), while the perfusion rate was maintained at 1.5 vvd (Figure 2b). The harvest flow rate varied mostly between 1.2 and 1.4 vvd and the mAb titer in the harvest reached up to 1 g/L (Figure 2c). Thanks to proper adjustment of the nutritional depth in the perfusion medium, the low CSPR selected in the production runs (15 pl/(cell*day)) was sufficient to maintain a stable perfusion culture with high cell-specific mAb productivity, low growth rate and high viability. Consequently, the product was more concentrated in reduced harvest volumes, which was beneficial for the process efficiency and for the subsequent capture chromatography.
Downstream process.
The downstream process in the pilot-scale run was started 2 days after starting the perfusion system, which allowed for building a buffer volume of the harvest in the HV. The clarified harvest was continuously purified for 17 consecutive days, from cultivation Day 2 until Day 19, aided by the control system Orbit to achieve process automation. During the initial days, the harvest mAb concentration was low, which resulted in a low concentration in the purified product. The harvest concentration increased until cultivation day 5, and after it had stabilized, the downstream process reached steady state. The downstream process in the small-scale run was started 15 days after the start of the perfusion system, and run continuously for 9 days, from cultivation Day 15 until day 24.
In Figure 3, the operation of the downstream process on pilot scale during cultivation Day 15 is shown, illustrating several purification cycles over a couple of hours. In the capture step (Figure 3a), two large peaks can be seen during the product recovery step: the lower, broader peak corresponds to the elution of the product, and the higher peak corresponds to the wash phase, where the impurities are washed out from the column. The cycle time was around 42 min, and the recovery phases were, as mentioned, 40 min long. Hence, after product recovery in one of the columns, the loading of the two other columns continued for 2 min before changing the cycle. The breakthrough curves from the two columns that were loaded are also shown in the figure. The breakthrough curve from the first column reached levels of up to 30% during the interconnected load, with respect to the maximum level, which was the feed concentration. The PCC process was designed to be operated with a product breakthrough of 50% after the first column. However, the lower value in the breakthrough percentage obtained in the run was due to the fact that a 30% safety margin in the column capacity was considered, leading to a slight column oversizing. Regarding the breakthrough from the second column, the UV signal decreased only slightly during the loading, meaning that some product, although a small amount, was lost in that stream.
The chromatograms from the polishing steps are shown in Figure 3b. As previously explained, the polishing steps are run with product collected from three capture cycles, which is why the polishing cycles were longer. To enable process synchronization between the capture and polishing steps, the process time for the polishing steps should not exceed the time for three capture cycles. The polishing cycle started with the loading of the CEX column, which corresponds to the plateau in the UV1 signal in the figure. After the loading and a wash phase, the elution of the CEX column followed. The UV1 signal was measured after the CEX column and the UV2 signal after the AEX column. Since the AEX step was run in flow-through mode, an increase in the UV absorbance could be seen on the UV2 sensor shortly after the UV1 sensor. Between the CEX and the AEX steps, there was a 1:1 inline dilution, meaning the loading flow rate in the AEX step was twice as high as the elution flow rate in the CEX step. As the figure shows the UV in relation to time, and not volume, the area under the peak from the UV2 signal is roughly half of that from the UV1 signal during this phase. The start and end of the pooling phases, from both columns, were automated using a pooling control strategy, which has been implemented in previous work (Lofgren et al., ). With this pooling control strategy, the pooling started at a predefined threshold UV value. Furthermore, a UV level cut-off (i.e., the level at which the product pooling ends) was calculated based on the maximum peak height, which related to the product concentration. This way, the pooling strategy could adapt to varying incoming concentrations, which became especially important during the first days of cultivation, where the harvest concentration was still low. After the elution phase, the CIP, regeneration, and equilibration phases took place for both polishing columns in parallel. Pump A was used for the CEX column and the sample pump for the AEX column. During these phases, the UV2 monitor provided the signal from the AEX column while the UV1 monitor was not connected to an active flow path.
An important aspect in biomanufacturing is the product traceability, which is discussed in the guidelines on continuous biomanufacturing by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA, ). In the case of continuous manufacturing, ensuring traceability means knowing the path that each specific portion of product followed through the downstream process. In a PCC operation, the product that is eluted is the one that was loaded in the previous cycle, but it also contains a fraction of the product that was loaded two cycles before, due to the interconnection of the columns in the loading phase. In Figure 3a, the product in the capture elution phase at around 100 min corresponds to product loaded during the two previous cycles (approximately the first 80 min). The product eluted from three capture cycles (at around 90, 135, and 175 min, corresponding to the blue shaded peaks in Figure 3a) was collected in one of the VI bottles. Then the solvent/detergent stock solution was dosed, and after 60 min of incubation, the product was purified in the polishing steps, corresponding to the polishing cycle starting at 250 min (blue shaded area in Figure 3b), and finally the product eluted at ca 330 min (red shaded peak in Figure 3b). Overall, the residence time of this portion of product in the downstream process was 330 min. In addition, the mean residence time in the HV (where the volume was kept at around 1 reactor volume and the flow rate was around 1.4 vvd) was  17 h. Since the HV was run as a continuous stirred tank, the residence time distribution could be estimated through simulation of an ideal stirred tank. Taking this into account, the processing of 99% of the product is up to five times the mean residence time, that is,  86 h, or 3.6 days. In total, the residence time of the product including the HV and the downstream process can be up to 91.2 h, almost 4 days. Hence, a deviation in the quality of the product entering the HV at a specific time could affect the finished product for up to 4 days. To deal with this situation, a valve before the HV was introduced in the flow path to divert the clarified harvest to an additional vessel in case a deviation was detected.
Another important aspect in biomanufacturing is the recovery yield. In the presented downstream process, different yields were obtained on small and pilot scale. The total recovery yield on small scale was around 70%, with a maximum of 78% (Supporting Information: Figure S5). The process setup was not optimized for small scale, in particular not the method to empty the VI bottles. A substantial amount of product remained in the VI bottles after the loading was finished, which led to a decreased yield in that step. In addition, product loss in the loading of the capture columns occurred, which further reduced the total yield. On pilot scale, the process was operated to mitigate the mentioned issues and increase the total yield. The product loss during the emptying of the VI bottles was insignificant on pilot scale, and the aforementioned measures for estimating the product loss in the capture step allowed keeping a high yield throughout the pilot-scale run, reaching levels of around 90%, with a maximum total yield of 95% (Figure 4a).
During the first days of the purification run on pilot scale, the harvest concentration was low; it increased from 0.2 to 0.9 g/L during the first 6 days. To compensate for the low initial concentration, the capture loading volume per cycle was set to 1450 ml, instead of the nominal value of 1188 ml. The higher initial loading volume, combined with a capture loading flow rate matching the initial low TFF perfusion flow, increased the capture cycle time from 40 to 60 min. On the first day, a total yield of almost 90% was achieved in the capture step. However, since the harvest concentration increased quickly, the yield decreased due to a higher amount of product loss in the breakthrough of the capture columns. To increase the yield, the loading volume was reduced to the nominal value (1188 ml), and once steady-state operation was reached, a yield of 90% could once again be observed on cultivation Day 7. During Days 8 and 9, the capacity of the capture columns started to decrease slightly, and more product was detected in the breakthrough pool, exceeding the resin lifetime revealed by the resin stability study (Supporting Information: Figure S6). The columns had at this point been reused in approximately 300 cycles, which is a higher number of cycles than typically performed on Protein A resins, demonstrating the robustness of the ZCa resin (Rathore et al., ). The columns were exchanged on Day 9, and on the following days, the downstream process was running normally and with high yields. The yields of the individual steps were close to 100%, except for the capture step, where most of the product loss occurred. In particular, product was lost in the breakthrough stream, as can be seen in Figure 3, and this loss was estimated to 7%-10%. Without the use of PCC, the product loss in this step would have been considerably higher as the product flowing through the first capture column would have been lost instead of being adsorbed on the second capture column.
The operation of the pilot-scale ICB resulted in a mean volumetric productivity of 0.92 g/(L*day) during the steady-state phase of the perfusion, with a maximum of 1 g/(L*day), while the difference between the downstream productivity and the upstream productivity was small due to the high yields (Figure 4b). Considering the working volume of the bioreactor, which was 30 L, the ICB produced on average 28 g of mAb per day. The total production of purified mAb during 20 days of operation was around 470 g. Given the high productivity obtained and the comparatively long lifetime of the ZCa resin, this process is economically competitive with other ICBs based on conventional Protein A resins.
Product quality and purity.
The steady-state operation of the ICB ensured a stable product quality profile of the purified mAb. With regard to the N-glycosylation profile of mAb, a shift to a higher percentage of galactosylation (G1F, G2F) occurred during the first days of the process (Figure 5a). From Day 7, the glycosylation pattern remained fairly stable due to the steady-state operation of the bioreactor. It should be noted that high cell density inoculation of the bioreactor from a N-1 perfusion culture reduced the transition period to a steady-state from 10 to 7 days, compared to our previous work (Gomis-Fons, Schwarz, et al., ). This shift in product quality could potentially be further accelerated by discarding the harvest from the first days of the culture, considering that the accumulated product has a residence time of up to 4 days, as discussed above. In addition, the setpoint of the harvest volume in the HV could be reduced to decrease the residence time of the product in this step. For example, a reduction of the HV volume to 0.1 reactor volumes would reduce the residence time from 91.2 to 14.1 h.
The removal of host cell proteins (HCPs) and DNA is a vital part of the downstream process, as these impurities make up a large part of all contaminants in an antibody production process, compromising the safety and quality of the final product (Y. Li, ). The CHO-HCP content was quantified in the harvest as well as in the output from each purification step at several time points. Efficient HCP removal was seen for both the capture step and the two polishing steps, with a ca 5-log reduction in the final product as compared to the harvest (Figure 5b). After the capture step using the ZCa resin, the impurity levels were reduced from >105 ppm to on average 300 ppm, meaning approximately a 3-log reduction, which is expected from commercial Protein A resins (Cytiva, ; Scheffel et al., ). A further decrease is demonstrated after CEX, with HCP levels of on average 13 ppm and finally 2 ppm after AEX, which is low in comparison to other mAb processes (Cytiva, ). Moreover, the DNA clearance was highly effective with high DNA log reduction values (LRVs) for the first set of capture columns on pilot scale, also leading to a higher LRV after CEX (Figure 5c) (Butler et al., ). There was a slight decrease in LRV at Day 10, but despite this, the DNA levels were below the detection limit after AEX throughout the entire run.
Regarding the virus inactivation, no experiments were performed to analyze the presence of virus in the product, but the implementation and efficacy of the solvent/detergent VI method has already been described in several publications (Martins et al., ; Orozco et al., ). Dichtelmuller et al. performed a comprehensive study of the virus inactivation process conditions, which was the base for the conditions selected in the present work (Dichtelmuller et al., ). According to this study, a concentration of 3 g/L Tnbp and 10 g/L detergent, and an incubation time of 60 min are the most common production conditions and enough to reach >5-log inactivation, where a 4-log inactivation is considered acceptable. The feasibility of this downstream process on small scale with the above-described solvent/detergent concentrations has been demonstrated (Scheffel et al., ). In the pilot-scale run, however, both concentrations were decreased to minimize the consumption and disposal of Tnbp, which is a hazardous and environmentally unfriendly compound. According to Dichtelmuller's study, a 4-log inactivation can be achieved even at the lower concentrations used in the pilot-scale run (Dichtelmuller et al., ).
The solvent used in the VI step, Tnbp, was not detected in the final product after AEX chromatography. The results show that Tnbp was successfully removed during the CEX chromatography step with the flowthrough, while the product in the CEX pool did not contain any detectable Tnbp residues (Supporting Information: Figure S7). The detergent used in the VI step, Tween 20, could not be detected in the purified product. However, it is a biocompatible agent and it is even commonly used in the formulation of monoclonal antibodies (Y. Li et al., ).
mAb aggregate levels after different steps in the downstream process have been monitored by SEC. The mild conditions of the capture PCC step and VI by solvent/detergent, with a pH of 5.5 instead of 3.2-3.5 which is conventionally used in a traditional mAb process (Arnold et al., ; Baur et al., ), resulted in insignificant levels of aggregates and fragments during the whole process after each unit operation with a maximum percentage of 0.3% aggregates and no fragments after CEX, and a concentration lower than the detection limit after AEX (Supporting Information: Figure S8). For comparison, typical values of aggregate levels in the purified product obtained in integrated continuous mAb processes range between 0.3% and 2.5% (Cytiva, ; Godawat et al., ; Steinebach et al., ; Warikoo et al., ). In previous work, the ZCa resin was compared to commercial MabSelect SuRe for purification of IgG4, resulting in no aggregates for the ZCa resin and a substantial amount of aggregates for MabSelect SuRe with acidic elution conditions (Scheffel & Hober, ).
