iology that influence both productivity and product quality. With the benefit of global physiological perspectives, we continue to gain a deeper understanding of metabolism. Global views at a systemic level will significantly enhance our capacity to manipulate cell metabolism and thus increase productivity and product quality



The assembly of the high mannose backbone starts on the outside surface of the ER. The glycan is linked to a membrane-anchored dolichol carrier through a pyrophosphate group. After the seven-sugar backbone is formed (with five mannose and two N-acetyl glucosamine), it flips over to the interior of the ER. No transporters are needed for the transport of the backbone glycan; rather, a flippase catalyzes their translocation into the ER lumen. Once inside the ER, the backbone acquires an additional four mannose and three glucose to become a mature core. The mature core is then transferred to a binding site (Asn-X-Thr/Ser) on a nascent protein molecule. However, not all glycan binding sites may receive the core glycan. This might be due to competition between local protein folding, which could make the glycosylation site inaccessible and the transfer of the glycan core to the site impossible. Hence, on the same glycosylation site of a protein, some molecules may be occupied by a glycan while others may not.
After translation, protein molecules are assisted by many chaperone molecules to undergo the folding process. The three glucose on the glycan core serve as a quality control signal for the proper folding of these glycoprotein molecules. The three glucose are quickly removed from the glycan to generate a monoglucosylated intermediate. But a glucosyltransferase quickly adds a glucose to any protein molecule that is not yet correctly folded. The presence of the monoglucosylated glycan signals the protein molecule liable to bind to the ER lectins calnexin and calreticulin, and the oxidoreductase ERp57. ERp57 facilitates the formation of disulfide, a critical step in protein folding. The folding process continues until the absence of the glucose residue allows the folded molecule to dissociate from the lectin. The "correctly" folded protein molecule is then transported to the Golgi apparatus by a membrane vesicle.
Misfolded proteins, with the de-glucosylated mannose exposed, are subjected to the removal of their terminal α1,2-bonded mannose. Trimming of the mannose then serves as the signal to divert the unfolded molecules to the ER disposal system, through which they are exported to a proteasome for degradation.
Well-folded glycoprotein molecules are enclosed in membrane vesicles of the ER, where they bud and then translocate to the Golgi apparatus. Once there, they fuse with the Golgi body membrane and the glycoprotein cargos are released into the lumen of the Golgi apparatus.

Glycan Extension in the Golgi Apparatus
Inside the Golgi, mannose is trimmed further from the N-glycan core, reducing the number of mannoses from nine to three to form the tri-mannosyl (Man 3 GlcNAc 2 ) core structure (Figure 3.22) . However, incomplete trimming does occur, leading to the synthesis of high-mannosetype glycans (Man 5-9 GlcNAc 2 ) ( Figure 3 .20). After mannose trimming, more monosaccharide units are added to the glycan one at a time. The extension of the glycan from the 3-mannose core creates complex-type glycans, while the extension from those with 4-5 mannose creates hybridtype glycans. Three monosaccharide units constitute most of the extended N-glycans: N-acetyl glucosamine, galactose, and sialic acid. Different glycosyltransferases are involved in these reactions. Each enzyme adds a different monosaccharaide and forms a specific glycosidic linkage to the growing core glycan. Each glycosidic bond is defined by the two sugars being linked and the position of the carbon on each sugar. The incoming monosaccharide provides the activated carbonyl group (by linking to a nucleotide), and the receiving carbohydrate moiety on the growing glycan on the protein provides a hydroxyl group for forming the glycosidic bond. For example, the two-terminal mannose residues each use its C1 (carbonyl carbon) to link to C3 and C6 of the base mannose, respectively (Figure 3.22) .
Each terminal mannose can be further extended by the addition of a N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc). The terminal receiving mannose has three hydroxyl groups, a pair of which (carbon 2 and carbon 4, or carbon 2 and carbon 6) can be extended by the addition of a GlcNAc. The extension reaction does not take place on all of the available reaction (receiving) sites. If one of each of the two-terminal mannoses of the Man 3 -GlcNAc 2 core are extended by the addition of a GlcNAc, it becomes a biantennary glycan (Figure 3 .20). If more than one hydroxyl group is extended on either one or both terminal mannoses, then the glycan becomes tri-or tetra-antennary. There are a number of different glycosyltransferases, each of which recognizes different pairs of incoming nucleotide sugars and substrate glycans, and which catalyzes the formation of different glycosidic bonds. A number of glycosyltransferases do allow for some flexibility in glycosidic bond formation. In mammals, some glycosyltransferases have a large number of isozymes. Their expression may be tissue-specific. Some isozymes are co-expressed in some cells. Roughly a couple dozen glycosyltransferases are prominent in contributing to the glycan heterogeneity in recombinant proteins.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Man GlcNAc Fuc Gal NANA NGNA ER N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Man GlcNAc Fuc Gal NANA
Each growing glycan, thus, has multiple available reaction paths for extension. Many of those different reaction paths will lead to different products (Figure 3.22) . However, in other cases, the reactions of adding sugars to different branches of the glycan may occur in different orders but lead to the same product. In the extension of the first layer GlcNAc to the 3-mannose core, the addition of GlcNAc to the base mannose (catalyzed by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III (GnT-III)) suppresses further extension of the glycan. This bisecting GlcNAc thus has a strong effect on glycan structure. The enzyme fucosyltransferase has the opposite effect of increasing structural diversity; it adds a fucose to the base sugar (GlcNAc), thus making two versions of most glycans, fucosylated or unfucosylated. Both the bisecting GlcNAc and the core fucose affect the biological activities of many protein molecules (e.g., the ADCC activity of IgG, and the binding of EGF to EGFR).
The web of glycan extension reactions forms a complex network which, when drawn out graphically, indeed resembles a network of diverging and converging paths leading to a number of different fully-extended N-glycan structures (Figure 3 .23). Adding to the complexity is the compartmentalization within the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membranous compartments commonly grouped into cis, medial, trans, and trans-Golgi network (TGN) cisternae. These cisternae are not biochemically homogeneous. The glycosyltransferase composition varies among different compartments, with the earlier enzymes more enriched in the early compartment and vice versa. As the secretory glycoproteins traverse through these Golgi compartments, the extension reactions will favor the addition of different glycans. An extending glycan that fails to acquire a particular sugar in an early compartment may thus not get extended further after moving on to a later compartment.
The reaction path for glycan extension in the Golgi apparatus is a rather long one. Protein molecules spend tens of minutes passing through the Golgi, but the residence time that each protein molecule spends in the Golgi is not uniform. Not all protein molecules will have fully extended glycans. In fact, often only a portion will be fully extended and 

Fuc
Gal Sia contain sialic acid. IgG molecules have glycans on Asn 297 of the heavy chain constant region and in some cases also in the hypervariable region. Sialylation is rarely seen in the glycan on Asn 297 , but is more often seen in the one in the hypervariable region.
A very large number of glycan structures can be formed in the N-glycosylation pathway; typically only a fraction of all these possible configurations constitute the dominant types. The patterns of glycans on recombinant DNA proteins produced in different production cell lines but derived from the same host cell line are likely to be different. The pattern is also affected by different culture conditions.

O-Glycosylation
O-glycosylation is initiated in the endoplasmic reticulum or in the Golgi apparatus. Unlike N-glycosylation, which is initiated by the translocation of a preassembled core-oligoglycan (Man 9 Glc 3 ) to the nascent protein, O-glycosylation starts by adding monosaccharides directly to the protein and extends mostly through one-by-one addition of more sugars. There is no known consensus sequence for the addition of O-glycans to serine and threonine, although clusters of O-linked glycosylation are often seen in regions with a high density of serine/proline/threonine. The OHgroups of serine and threonine can be linked to glucose, N-acetylglucosamine, galactose, N-acetyl galactosamine, fucose, xylose, or mannose. O-glycans can thus be more complex and heterogeneous than N-glycans, because they lack the consensus attachment amino acid sequence and a single common core glycan structure. O-glycans are abundantly represented in some glycoproteins. The O-glycans seen in recombinant proteins are mostly of the mucin-type structure with an N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) as the first sugar. Etanercept (Embrel, a fusion protein of TNF α-Fc for rheumatoid arthritis treatment) has 3 N-glycosylation sites and 11 O-glycosylation sites. Most of those O-glycans are linked to serine/threonine through O-GalNAc, whereas in the O-glycan of factor VII, O-fucose and O-glucose are also seen ( Figure 3 .24).
The attachment of N-acetylgalactosamine to the -OH group of serine/threonine is initiated by GalNAc-transferases. The presence of GalNAc recruits other enzymes to add more GalNAc to nearby serines/threonines. Subsequently, a number of enzymes catalyze the addition of different sugars (glucose, galactose, GalNAc) to form different core O-glycans. This is followed by core extension (e.g., by adding more galactose) and O-glycan capping (e.g., by the addition of sialic acid, fucose, or sulfate). Like N-glycosylation, various glycosyltransferases are locally enriched in different compartments of the Golgi apparatus. Some glycosyltransferases are probably shared with N-glycan biosynthesis. Like N-glycan synthesis, the formation of the different cores of O-glycans is affected by the relative abundance of different enzymes in the tissue or the cell. The addition and extension of different glycans is also affected by the protein domain structure, although our knowledge with respect to the effect of protein domain on glycosylation is still rather limited.

Synthesis and Transport of Nucleotide Sugar Precursors
The substrate for glycosidic bond formation by glycosyltransferase is a nucleotide sugar. The carbonyl carbon of the sugar is the carbon that will form the glycosidic bond. Before it can react with the glycan substrate, the carbonyl carbon of the sugar substrate (glucose 1-phosphate, galactose 1-phosphate, N-acetyl-glucosamine-phosphate, or mannose 1-phosphate) needs to be "activated" by reacting with a nucleotide (NTPs: UTP, CTP, GTP) to form NDP-sugar or CMP-sialic acid at the expense of an equivalent of 1 ATP. Different sugars are linked to different NDPs. Uracil is used for glucose-and galactose-based sugars (e.g., UDP-glucose and UDP-galactose), guanyl for mannose and fucose, and cytidyl for sialic acid.
Mannose, galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, and fucose are synthesized in branches of the glycolysis pathway (Figure 3 .25). All four sugars are activated at their first (carbonyl) carbon. Therefore, they link to glycans through the formation of (1→n) glycosidic bonds. For example, UDP-GlcNAc is added to a growing core by the formation of an N-acetylglucosamine β (1→n) mannose bond. The linkage can be through a number of possible carbons on mannose (e.g., 2, 3, 4, or 6) depending on the position of the mannose in the glycan. Upon giving away its sugar, an NMP is formed as the reaction product, and is transported back to the cytosol (Figure 3 .25).
Sialic acid is a generic name for the derivative of 9-carbon neuraminic acid and is also the name of the most commonly seen N-acetylneuraminic acids. The second carbon of neuraminic acid is activated; thus CMP-2-sialic acid will form a sialyl (2→n) bond with galactose. The synthesis of all the precursor sugars occurs in the cytosol, including a nine-carbon neuraminic acid and N-acetyl neuraminic acid. Similarly, all nucleotide sugars are formed in the cytosol, except for CMP-sialic acid. The activation of sialic acid to CMP-sialic acid occurs in the nucleus.
The backbone of N-linked glycan is synthesized on the cytosolic side of the ER membrane through the membrane-anchored dolichol. The nucleotide sugars used in the formation of the backbone, GDP-mannose and UDP-N-acetyl glucosamine, are synthesized in the cytosol and directly react with dolichol or with the growing glycan backbone. The assembled backbone is then "flipped" into the ER and the subsequent reactions occur inside the ER. Transporters are used to supply the nucleotide sugars involved in the subsequent reactions, including GDP-mannose and GDP-glucose in the ER.
Galactose Gal-1-P G-1-P UDP-Gal UDP-Glc Mannose Mannose Man-6-P Man-1-P GDP-Man Fructose Fructose Fru-1-P ER Glyceraldehyde-3-P GAP + DHAP F-1,6-diP F-6-P G-6-P NeuAC NeuAC Nucleus CMP-NeuAC CMP-NeuAC ManNAc-6-P D-Glucosamin-6-P NAcD-Glucosamine-6-P GlcNAc-1-P UDP-GlcNAc Glycolysis PEP Cytosol ER Galactose Gal-1-P G-1-P UDP-Gal UDP-Glc Mannose Mannose Man-6-P Man-1-P GDP-Man Fructose Fructose Fru-1-P Glyceraldehyde-3-P GAP + DHAP F-1,6-diP F-6-P G-6-P NeuAC NeuAC Nucleus CMP-NeuAC CMP-NeuAC ManNAc-6-P D-Glucosamin-6-P NAcD-Glucosamine-6-P GlcNAc-1-P UDP-GlcNAc Glycolysis PEP Cytosol
The nucleotide sugars for the extension reactions in the Golgi apparatus are also transported through transporters (Figure 3 .26). These include CMP-sialic acid, GDP-fucose, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, UDP-galactose, and the activated sulfate donor (3′-phosphoadenosine, 5′-phosphosulfate). All of these transporters are antiporters, requiring an equal molar exchange of the import of nucleotide sugar and the export of the corresponding NMP (as a product of glycosyltransferase reactions) during the process.

Glycan Diversity among Species
A concern about recombinant protein therapy is the possible elicitation of immunogenicity. An antibody elicited by and against the protein therapeutic can result in neutralization of the therapeutic protein and may result in an unintended drop in efficacy, thus causing serious adverse clinical effects.
The potential immunogenicity of recombinant therapeutics may arise from an aglycosylated protein core or from the glycans associated with it. There are at least two mechanisms by which glycans on a protein may affect the immunogenicity of a human therapeutic: 1) by being a foreign glycan structure, or 2) by shielding a segment of the protein that is otherwise antibody inductive.
Recombinant human therapeutic proteins produced in different organisms or cells are often differently glycosylated (such as those from CHO versus yeast) or aglycosylated (such as from CHO versus E. coli) (Panel 3.28). 8 Comparison of those proteins indicates that the "shielding" effect of minimizing immunogenicity is affected by the nature of the protein as well as by the source of the protein. The concerns about the immunogenicity of different glycoforms of the rDNA proteins produced in insect cells and in transgenic plants has hindered those technologies' application for rDNA therapeutic protein production. Glycosylated proteins produced in CHO and mouse myeloma cells are minimally immunogenic. The glycosylation pathway is highly conserved in mammals. Nevertheless, divergence among different species is seen. Furthermore, the expression pattern of glycosylation genes in different tissues or in cells derived from different tissues is often different. Host cells derived from different species or from different tissues may produce recombinant proteins with different glycosylation patterns. For example, the sialic acid in glycans produced in animal cells can be different from that produced in human cells. Human glycans have terminal N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA). NANA can be further hydrolyzed to N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) in most other mammals. However, humans have a truncated CMP-sialic acid hydroxylase that renders it unfunctional. 9 Thus, glycoproteins produced in non-human cells have some NGNA that is not present in human glycoproteins. Similarly, glycoproteins expressed in CHO cells have only terminal α(2,3)-linked sialic acids, in contrast to α(2,6) and α(2,3) seen in humans, due to the near absence of expression of 2,6-sialyltransferase in CHO cells. Such differences in glycan composition have posed a concern; however, immunogenicity of recombinant proteins directly caused by variant glycans is still rare.
Gal-1-P GlcNAc-1-P GalNAc-1-P 2Pi 2ATP UMP UMP glycan glycan-x CMP CMP GMP Golgi lumen Cytosol GMP GDP- fucose GDP- fucose UDP Pi UTP CMP- sialic acid CMP- sialic acid UDP-Gal UDP-GlcNAc UDP-GalNAc UDP-Gal UDP-GlcNAc UDP-GalNAc glycan glycan-x glycan glycan-x GDP Pi Gal-1-P GlcNAc-1-P GalNAc-1-P 2Pi 2ATP UMP UMP glycan glycan-x CMP CMP GMP Golgi lumen Cytosol GMP GDP- fucose GDP- fucose UDP Pi UTP CMP- sialic acid CMP- sialic acid UDP-Gal UDP-GlcNAc UDP-GalNAc UDP-Gal UDP-GlcNAc UDP-GalNAc glycan glycan-x glycan glycan-x GDP Pi •
In the production of biosimilar biologics, a critical issue is the production of glycoproteins with "the same" glycoform distribution as the original innovative product. In almost all cases, the cell lines as well as the processes used for the production of the biosimilar are different from those employed in the production of the original innovative product. It is therefore a challenge to devise a robust process that can produce protein molecules with the desired or target glycosylation pattern. Many factors affect the glycosylation pattern of the product, including the expression pattern of glycosylation enzymes in the cell line, the nucleotide sugar supply, the cultivation conditions, and the metabolic state of the cells. The glycosylation pattern is also affected by signaling pathways and their modulators. Further complicating the issue is the fact that the glycosylation pathways in the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus are not only present to process product proteins, but also a very large fraction of all cellular proteins. Thus, the effect of modulating the pathway is not limited to the product protein but potentially includes other aspects of cell physiology. Due to the importance of glycoforms in the assessment of the quality of therapeutic proteins from a regulatory perspective, we will likely see growing efforts to better understand and control glycoforms in the near future.

Concluding Remarks
I n this chapter, we presented a brief overview of the broad areas of cellular metabolic processes. We covered the core of energy metabolism, the process of glucose utilization through glycolysis, the PPP, and the TCA cycle, and examined how all of these affect cell growth behavior and productivity. Through interconnected pathways, the central corridor of energy metabolism also influences the synthesis and glycosylation of the product proteins. The excessive consumption of glucose and glutamine and the corresponding accumulation of lactate and ammonium in culture contribute to growth inhibition and low productivity. Lactate consumption in the late stage of culture has been positively associated with a high productivity. There are, therefore, ample incentives to better understand cell metabolism and search for new ways of manipulating it that can better redirect the process. In recent years, we have developed a better understanding of the link between glycolytic regulation and growth control. We have also established better tools to probe the relationship between metabolic flux distribution and other aspects of phys-Introduction T he quality of the product is a most important aspect of manufacturing for products of therapeutic applications, even more so for biologics. The complex structures of those products make the quality determinants harder to quantify. Ensuring the manufacturing process produces these biologics of consistent quality is critical for the manufacturer as well as for the public. Manufacturing processes should be designed to robustly deliver consistent yields and product quality. Increasingly cells and viruses with even higher degrees of complexity than proteins are employed as therapeutic agents. Although gene and cell therapy products are still few, maintaining and monitoring the quality of these products will only become more crucial. The vast knowledge and experience of therapeutic protein manufacturing will help set the path forward for the development of manufacturing processes for these new products.
What constitutes product quality? Generally speaking, a product is established by its structural identity (Panel 4.1). Sometimes, structural variants of the product arise in the manufacturing process. 1 These must be controlled in the drug substance so as to restrict their levels to within acceptable limits. Most therapeutic proteins are glycoproteins whose glycans vary somewhat between individual protein molecules, but whose glycan heterogeneity must be within a certain bound. Inevitably, the product will have some contaminants, which must also fall within a set limit. Finally, the product must be tested and found biologically functional and safe before product release. The general quality requirements and characterization methods are detailed in Table 4 .1. The productivity of cell culture bioprocesses is currently very high. For many proteins, such as IgG, the titer in the reactor has exceeded the highest level in its native environment in vivo. At such high concentrations, physical interactions with other components may differ from those in older generation processes or those in vivo. These molecular interactions may pose challenges in protein aggregation or host cell protein contamination. The high productivity achieved nowadays is accomplished with a high cell concentration and often high-stress culture conditions such as high sugar content, high salt and waste metabolite concentration, and low temperature in the production bioreactor. Under more extreme culture conditions, the secreted product may be subject to chemical modifications as well as enzymatic modifications caused by enzymes released from dead cells. Some higher-order protein structural changes, such as aggregation or fragmentation, may even take place during the product recovery process. For some products, the productivity of the producing cell line has reached or even exceeded the secretion rate of professional secretors in the human body (e.g., liver cells and antibody-and insulinsecreting cells). It is unclear whether these hyperproducing cells, having been pushed to the limit of some of their functions related to protein synthesis and secretion, have exposed their product to a higher probability of deviation (e.g., a higher degree of heterogeneity in a glycan profile or a higher rate of amino acid misincorporation).
The first task in ensuring consistent product quality in manufacturing is the identification of the properties of a given product that play a key role in its safety and clinical efficacy. This is undertaken while the product is being developed, and the knowledge is applied while developing the process. In the manufacturing process, the product is made in bioreactors, purified through downstream steps, stored as a drug substance, and then converted to a drug product for use in clinical application. The operating conditions in production and downstream recovery that may lead to unsatisfactory product quality should then be identified and the controlled range of critical process parameters defined. After the product is launched, the product quality data is continually collected, compiled, and analyzed in order to better control product quality during the manufacturing process. The process of quality enhancement and process improvement thus continues throughout the product's life cycle.
This chapter will first discuss those chemical and physical properties of protein biologics which are important quality attributes. This will be followed by a discussion on Quality by Design (QbD), an approach to process development whereby the manufacturing process and controls are proactively designed to deliver the intended product. The last section emphasizes the importance of maintaining consistent product quality throughout the entire life cycle of the product.

Quality of Protein Product
Identity of Protein Product I n protein production through recombinant cells, the identity of the product gene is dictated by the gene sequence that encodes the product and by the downstream purification process. In the early stages of product development, the chemical structural identity of the product is affirmed at both the gene sequence level and the protein level. During manufacturing, the product is routinely tested to ensure its structural integrity as well as to detect the presence of structural variants.

Molecular and immunochemical identity and quantification
The identity of a protein product is typically established by its molecular weight and chemical structure. The purified product protein is typically run on polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) to assess its molecular weight and purity in terms of contamination by other proteins. The purified protein solution is run on a polyacrylamide gel in an electrical field, which separates individual proteins based on their mobility as determined by their size or molecular weight (Figure 4.1) . The post-electrophoresis gel is stained with Coomassie Blue or Silver Stain to visualize the migration of the protein from its initial position. Typically, the protein sample loaded into PAGE is treated with sodium dodecyl sulfate that denatures the protein, dissociates non-chemically cross-linked protein subunits, and extends the protein to better reflect its size. Since larger proteins migrate at a slower rate, the molecular weight of a protein molecule can be determined by calibrating to a mixture of protein markers. PAGE also serves as a tool for checking protein purity. A highly purified product protein should show only the gel band(s) of the product without any contaminating band(s) of impurity. Some proteins consist of subunit proteins that are bound together by disulfide bonds (e.g., IgG). On a native (non-denatured) protein gel and a reduced gel (in which a reducing chemical breaks the disulfide bond), the protein thus displays different bands as the reduced monomers migrate at different rates down the gel. This type of analysis is often employed to detect low molecular weight species or fragments generated by enzymatic degradation.
Western Blot is another method used to identify the product protein. After the purified product protein is run on PAGE, the protein is blotted to a membrane. The membrane is then treated with an antibody against the product protein. The antibody, which had been previously labeled with an enzyme, isotope, or fluorogenic tag, binds to the protein band.
When the unbound antibody in the membrane is washed off and a chromogenic substrate of the antibody-conjugated enzyme is applied, the product protein bands appear in the correct molecular weight location.
Immunological method ELISA, which utilizes antibodies against the product protein, is widely used for measuring protein concentration. There are a number of different ways to implement ELISA. In one scenario, the antibody against the product protein is coated on a 96-well or 384-well assay plate (Figure 4.1b) . The sample solution containing the product at different dilutions is then added to allow for binding to the antibody. Then a second antibody that recognizes a different epitope of the product and has been conjugated to an enzyme is added to bind to the product that was captured by the antibody coated on the plate. After a washing step, the amount of the enzyme of the second antibody remaining on the coated surface is quantified by measuring the rate of the enzymatic reaction. The enzymes commonly used typically convert a chromogenic substrate to a product with a visible signal. that can be detected using a spectrophotometer. A standard curve constructed with a serially diluted, purified antigen is used to determine the concentration of the antigen in the sample. Such "sandwich ELISA" is used for quantification of antibody products and many other proteins. Another method specific to antibody quantification utilizes affinity chromatography. Protein A, which preferentially binds to antibodies, is immobilized on a column support. At neutral pH, the antibody molecule binds to Protein A through the Fc region while host-cell proteins, cell culture media components, and buffer flow through the column. Captured antibodies elute at acidic pH and are detected by UV absorbance at 280 nm. A calibration curve is derived from standards and the corresponding peak areas using linear regression analysis. Sample and control product concentrations are calculated from the calibration curve.

Peptide sequence identity
The most accurate check of protein identity is based on the primary structure, or the protein's amino acid sequence. This is generally done by the classical Edman degradation using an automated protein sequencer or by liquid chromatography followed by mass spectrometry. In Edman degradation, complex proteins with multiple chains are separated into single chain molecules. Large proteins are then enzymatically digested into fragments of less than 50 amino acids long. Next, the target protein or peptide is immobilized onto a solid and subjected to chemical hydrolysis from the protein's N-terminus. The released amino acid is made to fluoresce and identified in HPLC. By cycling through the terminal amino acid degradation process, the entire sequence of the protein can be established.
Amino acid sequence identity can also be established by mass spectrometry. To establish the sequence identity of the protein product, the purified protein is subjected to proteolysis to fragment the protein into smaller size peptides (typically, trypsin is used to cleave the C-side of a peptide bond adjacent to lysine or arginine) (Panel 4.2). This process cleaves the protein to peptides of mostly 15-30 amino acids long ( Figure  4 .2). The resulting mixture of peptides is then subjected to reverse-phase HPLC or capillary electrophoresis for separation. Next, the peptides are separated into peaks and fed into the mass spectrometer (MS) for detection. Each peptide peak will have a characteristic mass over charge ratio (m/z) of the corresponding tryptic peptide as compared to a reference standard. Further fragmentation using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) further fragments each peptide into a series of peptide fragment ions. Since each fragmentation event breaks a peptide bond and generates two fragments, one on the N-side (y-ion) and one on the C-side (b-ion), these y-and b-ions bear m/z values that are characteristic of the fragmentation pattern of the corresponding peptide. From this pattern, the amino acid sequence can be deduced (Figure 4 .3). Mass spectrometry can therefore be used for de novo sequencing in which the identity of the protein is unknown. Mass spectrometry is also used in sequence verification. By searching protein databases to match fragmentation patterns, mass spectrometry-based methods can be readily used to find the identity of a protein or even to identity proteins in a mixture. It is also a sensitive method for protein identity verification. If an amino acid in a peptide is altered or chemically modified in a small fraction of protein molecules, the fragmentation pattern in the mass spectrum will be different from the original. Mass spectrometry can also be used to detect contaminating protein in a purified protein sample. It is thus an important tool in protein identification as well as in chemical structural variants detection. Determining the identity of a protein with a known sequence using mass spectrometry after tryptic digestion.

Higher-order structure identity
The biological function and activity of a protein is dictated by its higher-order (secondary, tertiary, and quaternary) structure. Even if its amino acid sequence is unchanged, a protein molecule may have an altered secondary, tertiary, or quaternary structure. Conversely, the effects of an amino acid change on the functional activity of the protein is dependent on the site of the amino acid change and its effect on the higher order of protein structure. Changes in higher-order structure may result in different biological activity or even immunogenicity (Panel 4.3) . In the comparative study of biosimilar protein therapeutics, it is important to demonstrate that the higher-order structure of the biosimilar is the same as the innovator drug. Traditional analytical tools for protein higherorder structure determination include X-ray diffraction and NMR. These methods are of limited use for routine characterization because of the amount of materials needed and the lengthy time required for analysis.
Circular dichroism in the far-UV region is used to reveal changes in protein secondary structure. Due to the chiral nature of proteins, they have different absorption of left-handed and right-handed circularly polarized light. The absorption spectra of a protein in circular dichroism spectroscopy is affected not only by its α-helix and β-sheet content, but also its threedimensional structure. This type of investigation is thus a powerful tool in revealing secondary structural changes of a protein upon exposure to an agent of change.

Impurities
Therapeutic proteins produced in cell culture undergo extensive purification, virus inactivation, and viral particle clearance before becoming a drug substance for filling. However, impurities inevitably exist in the purified protein (Panel 4.4). The impurities can be from medium components or from molecules released from host cells or lysed host cells. The impurities may be compounds that are co-purified with the product protein or that are not sufficiently discriminated from the product in various product purification operations. They may also arise because of their physical association with the protein. Characterizing and quantifying these impurities is important in assuring the safety of the product. Impurities 

Host cell protein
The vast majority of therapeutic proteins are produced in non-human mammalian cells. The amount of native proteins secreted by host cells into the culture supernatant is small. However, with the high cell density and long duration of fed-batch cultures, these proteins may reach levels that affect final product purity. As the cell viability decreases in the late stage of culture, cell lysis inevitably leads to the release of host cell proteins. The host cell proteins co-purified with the product protein during recovery pose a risk of eliciting an immunoresponse in patients (Panel 4.4). Additionally, the contaminating host proteins may include some that have enzymatic activities or are prone to spontaneous chemical modification that, when present in the final drug product over a long period of time, may cause a change in product quality. The concern of host cell protein (HCP) contamination is magnified when the dose of the therapeutic protein is high, because the tolerance level of HCP is based on a dose, not the per-unit weight of the product. The detection and quantification of host cell protein contamination is thus required by regulatory agencies. A common analytical method relies on immunoassays, like ELISA, using the antiserum developed against the lysate of the host cell culture. The host cell lysate is used to establish a calibration curve for quantitation.

Structural Homogeneity of the Product
P rotein products made in cell culture may not be entirely uniform with respect to their structure (Panel 4.5). Glycans on different molecules of the same protein, or on different glycosylation sites of the same molecule, are somewhat different. In contrast, inhomogeneity may arise from the presence of a small fraction of molecules with variant structures, though the vast majority of the protein molecules have a "normal" structure, including primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures. For example, even though the fidelity of protein translation is very high, misincorporation of amino acids into the primary sequence occurs at low frequencies. 2 Under some culture conditions, such as shortage of a particular amino acid, the frequency of amino acid misincorporation may increase, leading to detectable quantities of variant proteins. 3 An enzymatic or post-translational modification reaction, such as signal peptide cleavage or C-terminal lysine cleavage, may not be completed, leading to a subpopulation of the product with variant structures.
In addition to the variants caused by the cells' protein processing variability, structural variants may also arise non-enzymatically after proteins are secreted into the culture medium, or occur in the course of downstream product recovery. For example, disulfide bonds in a protein may be reduced, further oxidized, scrambled, or cross-linked between different molecules. 4 Many of the protein variants seen in cell culture processes are also seen in the human body. Oftentimes, structural heterogeneity or variability of proteins occur naturally. Nevertheless, the extent of their variability in the final product must be controlled within a specified range.

Glycosylation Profile
As discussed above, the heterogeneity of glycan structures on proteins bears an important difference with other structural variations of proteins. Intrinsically, all product protein molecules should have the same primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure. Deviations or variants are anomalies and must be controlled to fall below certain levels. In contrast, heterogeneity in glycan structure is a natural phenomenon that occurs even for glycoproteins synthesized in the human body. When the glycans on a product protein are stripped off the protein and structurally analyzed, different structural classes of glycans are found to have different abundance levels for that protein, giving rise to a glycan distribution profile (Panel 4.6). Such distributions on a protein may vary with respect to the tissue in which it is expressed, the patient's health and age, etc.
For glycoproteins produced in cell culture, the glycan profile may vary with the host cell line or even the particular cell clone used, the cultural conditions, and the cells' metabolic state. Glycan structure may also be modified through degradation. For example, the presence of sialidases and other glycosidases, likely released from dead cells, causes the trimming of sialic acid or other sugar moieties from the glycan. The final glycan profile of the product is further affected by the isolation and purification process, as the selectivity of proteins with different types of glycans may differ across separation unit operations. Controlling glycan profiles within a prescribed bound throughout the manufacturing process is important for product release. 

Glycan assays
The presence of glycans of different compositions and sizes on protein molecules cause small differences in their motility through gels in electrophoresis (Panel 4.7). Since sialic acid carries a negative charge, glycoproteins with differing sialic acid levels can be separated in isoelectric focusing gel, cation exchange chromatography, or capillary electrophoresis. These methods can be used in characterizing glycans, especially when the glycan structure is not expected to exert a major effect on its clinical efficacy, and the characterization primarily serves the purpose of assuring consistency of product quality.
The glycan profile can also be determined by utilizing the varying binding affinities of different glycans to different lectins. The extent of a glycosylated protein binding to a lectin can be detected by biotin or digoxigenin-labeled lectins. Using a combination of lectins, often made into array format, one can gather information about a glycoprotein's carbohydrate profile. However, its resolution power is limited and it does not give complete structural information.
To structurally characterize the glycosylation profile on a protein, glycans are detached from the protein and subjected to chromatographic separation. For N-glycans, the cleavage of the glycan is achieved through a treatment with enzyme peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGase F). The free glycans are then fluorescently labeled with 2-aminobenzamide (2AB) at the reducing terminal N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). Following a cleanup step to remove protein and excess labeling reagent, the fluorescently labeled glycans are separated by liquid chromatography such as hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HIC). The relative % peak areas of the glycans are calculated and provide relative abundance of the various glycan species. However, there is no equivalent enzymatic treatment that releases O-glycans from serine or threonine. The release of intact glycan remains a major challenge in structural analysis of O-glycans. Chemical treatment can release these glycans, but it also alters the sugar structure, making it difficult to label and increase the sensitivity of detection. As a result, O-glycan analysis has lagged behind that of N-glycans. Structurally, O-glycans on a protein can be much more complex than N-glycans. The degree of complexity of O-glycans is dictated by the glycosylation gene expressed in the cell or tissue. Many of the O-glycosylated proteins are on the cell surface. Some expressed proteins in CHO cells are O-glycosylated, but, despite the large repertoire of enzymes involved in O-glycosylation, the number expressed in CHO cells is relatively small and the corresponding O-glycans are less structurally complex.
• The sialic acid content of glycans affects the pI of the protein and can be assayed by isoelectric focusing or by anion exchange chromatography • Binding assays using different lectins generate different binding patterns depending on the glycan structure • N-glycans can be enzymatically stripped off the protein and analyzed in HPLC after being fluorescently labeled with 2AB When marked with a fluorescent label, the relative area/peak height of the glycan gives the relative abundance level of different glycans in the overall protein (Figure 4.4) . However, when multiple glycosylation sites are present in a protein, it does not provide information on the distribution among the sites. It is possible to use protease to digest the protein to peptides, isolate and purify the glycosylated peptide, and then use mass spectrometry to determine the m/z ratio and determine the glycan distribution for each glycosylation site. However, if there are more than two sites the analysis can be rather complex. And even then, such analysis does not provide information on which glycans on one site are co-expressed with other glycans at another site of the same protein molecule. Such linked-glycan distribution on protein molecules will be readily available if a single-molecule-based analytical method is available.

Protein Structural Variants
Some protein variants bear alterations of their amino acid sequence. These alterations in the primary sequence may occur biologically through rare errors in protein or transcript processing or through chemical modification (Panel 4.8). 1 Some events, mostly occurring non-biologically, alter the higher-order protein structure, such as disulfide bond scrambling or the formation of aggregates.
Often, variants of a protein product are grouped based on routinely used protein characterization methods. Size (or aggregate) variants are those which appear as a large molecular weight peak based on size-exclusion chromatography. Charge variants are the molecules which are eluted from ion exchange chromatography and appear as separate and smaller peaks, or which form a separate band

Primary Sequence Variants
• Errors in protein expression - Amino acid misincorporation - Uncleaved leader sequence - C-terminal or N-terminal truncation - N-terminal pyroglutamate 
