Low flux, lactate-consumption state
Lactate transportation across the cytoplasmic membrane by MCT and lactate/pyruvate conversion by LDH are both reversible; one requires the co-transport of H + and the other the co-substrate NAD/N-ADH. They operate in unison in the same direction depending on the intracellular levels of NAD, NADH, pyruvate, and lactate, and the intracellular and extracellular concentration difference of lactate and H + . Their concentrations, in turn, are affected by the glycolysis generation rate and the mitochondrial intake rate of pyruvate. At a high glucose flux state, the pyruvate production rate is so high, exceeding its mitochondrial intake, that lactate is always excreted as described above. Conversely, at a low glycolysis flux state, the pyruvate production rate is low and it is possible to observe lactate consumption.
In vivo, lactate consumption occurs under some condition in some tissues, such as in the muscle, liver, and brain. In vitro, lactate consumption by cultured cells is seen when the glycolysis flux is low, typically after the rapid growth stage is over and when lactate has accumulated to a significant level. The propensity and rate of lactate consumption is thus affected by pH, where a low pH (high H + ) will facilitate lactate import and consumption.
A scenario of flux at a lactate consumption rate is shown in Figure  3 .14c. The reverse reaction of LDH generates pyruvate and NADH. Both pyruvate and NADH are further oxidized in the mitochondria. Since the overall capacity of MPC and the intake rate of pyruvate into the mitochondria is limited, the lactate consumption flux is also limited. It never reaches the magnitude of the flux of glucose at its high flux state. On a per cell basis, the specific lactate consumption rate is relatively small.
In a fed-batch culture, one may observe the three metabolic states happening in order (Figure 3 .15). In the fast-growing state, the metabolism is at a high flux state. As the growth rate slows down, it enters a low flux state with little lactate production, and then it may enter the lactate consumption state. 

Glucose consumption in the lactate-consumption state
The lactate consumed by cells cannot be converted to glucose in most cultured cells. A number of reactions in glycolysis are irreversible. The conversion of pyruvate to glucose in the reverse direction of glycolysis, called gluconeogenesis, requires the expression of a few additional enzymes to counter these irreversible reactions. In mammals, gluconeogenesis primarily occurs in the liver. During the period that cells are consuming lactate, many intermediates derived from glycolysis are still needed for maintaining cellular functions. For example, dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) is needed for supplying glycerol 3-phosphate for lipid synthesis and NADPH, derived in the PPP, is needed for reductive biosynthesis and for maintaining the cell's redox balance. Furthermore, glucose 6-phosphate is required to synthesize the glucosamine and galactose that are used in glycan synthesis for the production of recombinant proteins. The glycolysis pathway thus remains active during the lactate-consumption stage. The glucose consumption rate is small, but not zero (Panel 3.17).

NADH Balance Malate-Aspartate Shuttle
A total of 12 moles of reducing equivalent (10 NADH and 2 FADH 2 ) are produced when 1 mole of glucose is completely oxidized to CO 2 through glycolysis and the TCA cycle. The 12 mole reducing equivalents consume 6 moles of O 2 in oxidative phosphorylation, consistent with the stoichiometry of glucose oxidation (1 glucose/6 O 2 ). Among the 12 NADH/FADH 2 , 10 are produced in the TCA cycle in the mitochondria and the other 2 NADH are produced in cytosolic glycolysis (Panel 3.16). The two reducing equivalents produced in the cytosol must then be transported into the mitochondria where their oxidation consumes the sixth molecule of O 2 .
NADH does not pass through the inner membrane of the mitochondria. Rather, it passes its reducing potential through a carrier system called the malate-aspartate shuttle. This system takes the reducing equivalent into the mitochondria through an exchange of molecules between the mitochondria and the cytosol. On the cytosolic side, NADH is oxidized to NAD and transfers its reducing equivalent to malate by reducing oxaloacetate. Malate is then transported across the mitochondrial membrane via an antiporter with α-KG going in the opposite direction. Once inside the mitochondria, the reducing equivalent is transferred back to NADH by oxidizing malate to oxaloacetate (Figure 3 .16). The shuttle employs two antiporter systems involving malate/α-KG and aspartate/glutamate (hence the name "malateaspartate shuttle") to ensure the carbon flow and reducing equivalent flow are balanced by one other. The net result of a cycle of the shuttle is the transfer of a reducing equivalent from the cytosol to the mitochondria, or the conversion of a NADH to NAD in the cytosol and a simultaneous conversion of a NAD to NADH in the mitochondria. All other components involved in the shuttle then return to their original state. This is shown in Figure 3 .16, with the fluxes in opposite directions shown in gray with different arrowheads. On each side of the mitochondrial membrane, the same aminotransferase reaction (converting a glutamate/OAA pair to α-KG/aspartate pair, or vice versa) occurs, but operates in the opposite direction.
The transfer of the reducing equivalent of NADH from the cytosol into the mitochondria is therefore dependent not only on the NADH concentration but also on the concentrations of α-KG, malate, aspartate, and glutamate in the two compartments. Furthermore, diversions of fluxes of those shuttle components may also perturb the transport of the reducing equivalent.

Acetyl-CoA shuttle
Acetyl-CoA is the building block of fatty acids and cholesterol. It is generated primarily through the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate in the mitochondria. However, fatty acid biosynthesis takes place in the cytosol. Acetyl-CoA does not pass through the bilayer membrane. Instead, it is exported to the cytosol via an indirect process called the acetyl-CoA shuttle (Figure 3 .7). Citrate, formed by condensation of OAA and acetyl-CoA in the TCA cycle, is diverted from the TCA cycle and transported into the cytosol by an antiporter with one malate being transported in the opposite direction (Panel 3.18). Once in the cytosol, citrate is split into OAA and acetyl-CoA, consuming one ATP. Acetyl-CoA is then used for lipid biosynthesis. OAA gets reduced to malate at the expense of one NADH. Malate is then transported back to the mitochondria, or is converted to pyruvate after releasing a CO 2 and consuming one NA-DPH. Pyruvate then recycles into the mitochondria. The process of making fatty acids using acetyl-CoA is thus energetically expensive. Therefore, citrate and malate cross the mitochondrial membrane at a significant rate to sustain lipid biosynthesis. Citrate is not only present in the mitochondria, but also in the cytosol. Its accumulation can lead to allosteric inhibition of the conversion of F6P to F16BP in glycolysis.

Anaplerotic metabolism
As discussed earlier, the TCA cycle does not run perfect cycles all the time. When citrate, OAA, and other compounds are withdrawn from the cycle to serve other biosynthetic roles, they must be replenished in order to sustain the cycling at a steady state. This replenishment is mostly carried out by glutamine through anaplerotic reactions (Panel 3.19). Cells in culture consume glutamine at a high rate. The amount of glutamine consumed is in excess of that needed for biomass synthesis. Nearly half of the glutamine is converted to glutamate, which then enters the TCA cycle via α-KG to replenish OAA. α-KG can also be converted to isocitrate through an isocitrate dehydrogenase I catalyzed reaction at the expense of 1 NADPH. Isocitrate then becomes citrate for export out of the mitochondria. Another enzyme, pyruvate carboxylase, converts pyruvate to OAA and can also serve to replenish OAA to allow the TCA cycle to continue. 

Other fluxes across the mitochondria
Each pyruvate catabolized through the TCA cycle generates about 15 ATP and 3 CO 2 . These products are exported to the cytosol. The exportation of ATP necessitates the importation of an equal amount of ADP and PO 3-4 for its synthesis. Besides these major species, many other molecules (including amino acids and nucleotides) are transported into the mitochondria for DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.
Transportation across the mitochondrial inner membrane is dynamic and complex. Many compounds crossing the membrane are charged, yet their transport should not disrupt the proton and electric potential gradient that is fundamental to the energy generation function of the mitochondria. The transport across the mitochondrial membrane must be tightly regulated. Our understanding of that regulation is still rather limited.

Glutamine and Its Role in Energy Metabolism
1/10 that of glucose for many cell lines. G M ost cultured cells consume glutamine at a very high level, second only to glucose. Its molar consumption rate is about 1/5 to lutamine is not an essential amino acid for mammals; it becomes essential when cells are isolated from tissue and begin to grow in culture. Many tissues express glutamine synthetase that converts glutamic acid to glutamine by incorporating an ammonium at the expense of an ATP. The transcript level of this enzyme varies in cultured cells. Some cell lines can be readily adapted to grow in the absence of glutamine, apparently by increased glutamine synthase activity, while most cells are cultured in glutamine-supplemented medium.
Glutamine is a major amino acid constituent of cellular proteins. Additionally, its amide group supplies the nitrogen in the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases, which are the backbone of nucleic acids. However, the amount of glutamine consumed by cells far exceeds what is needed for synthesizing cellular components.
A large portion of glutamine is converted to glutamate by glutaminase in the cytosol or mitochondria. Glutamate in the mitochondria is converted to α-KG via glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), which releases an ammonium and NADH. Glutamate is also converted to α-KG via an aminotransferase reaction that transfers its amino group to the receiving OAA or pyruvate, forming aspartate or alanine, respectively. α-KG then enters the TCA cycle. The aminotransferase reaction retains the amino group in an amino acid, while the dehydrogenase reaction loses the amino group to ammonium. The former is likely to be favored in proliferating cells. Through α-ketoglutarate, glutamine is a major contributor to central metabolic flux by fulfilling its anaplerotic role as discussed above. The conversion of glutamine to α-KG releases one or two ammonium, depending on the path taken (aminotransferase or glutamate dehydrogenase). The ammonium generated is excreted to the extracellular environment. The ammonium that is released from glutamine contributes to the waste metabolite accumulation.

Amino Acid Metabolism
In addition to providing the building blocks for protein synthesis, amino acids are also used in the biosynthesis of many other cellular components. They contribute the nitrogen atom and amino group in the synthesis of nucleoside bases and nitrogen-containing sugars. They also provide part of their carbon skeleton to form groups like the methyl group (Panel 3.20). Mammals can synthesize only some of the twenty amino acids used in the translational synthesis of proteins. The nine (depending on the species) essential amino acids that mammals cannot synthesize must be acquired through diet. The non-essential amino acids alanine and aspartic acid (and asparagine) are synthesized from pyruvate and OAA, respectively by acquiring the amino group from donor amino acid glutamate through transaminase reactions. Glutamate is derived from glutamine supplied in the medium or formed by incorporating ammonium into α-KG at the expense of an NADH via a glutamate dehydrogenase reaction. The synthetic pathways of serine, cysteine, and arginine are expressed in many cells. Tyrosine is derived from phenylalanine. However, in cultured cells, the supply rates of these amino acids may be too low for proliferation. It is important to remember that an industrial high-producing cell line diverts a large portion of its amino acid pool to making the recombinant product. Even though non-essential amino acids can be synthesized by cells, their provision rate (i.e., the sum of uptake and synthesis) must be sufficiently high to prevent the misincorporation of amino acids into proteins. It has been shown that the depletion of the non-essential amino acid asparagine in culture medium can lead to amino acid misincorporation into the product protein.

Amino Acid Transport
Amino acids are taken up by cells through a large number of amino acid transporters (Figure 3.17 group of amino acids with similar chemical characteristics, such large neutral (uncharged side chain) amino acids, cationic, or anionic amino acids. The uptake rate of a particular amino acid is thus not only dependent on its own concentration, but also on the concentrations of other amino acids that compete for the same transporter. One amino acid may be taken up through more than one transporter, albeit with different affinities. Transport of amino acids across the cytoplasmic membrane is thus rather complex, and changing the concentration of one or several amino acids may affect the uptake rates of many.

Amino Acid Degradation and Growth Inhibition
In many industrial processes, especially in fed-batch cultures, concentrated amino acid solution is fed to the culture intermittently (see Chapter 9), causing some amino acids to accumulate to high levels transiently. This high level of amino acids may lead to excessive consumption. The amino acids taken up by cells in excess of cellular need are stripped of their nitrogen atoms and metabolized to pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, propionyl-CoA, or TCA cycle intermediates to enter energy metabolism ( Figure 3 .18, Panel 3.21). Some catabolic products are secreted into the medium. The catabolism of amino acids also releases ammonium. Ammonium and some catabolic products are growth inhibitory when accumulated to high levels. The catabolism of methionine, valine, and isoleucine gives rise to propionyl-CoA that is then carboxylated to methylmalonyl-CoA and further to succinyl-CoA, which enters the TCA cycle. In animals and humans, insufficient reactivity in the carboxylation reaction can lead to propionic acidemia. In culture, the accumulation of aliphatic amino acid degradation products may also lead to growth inhibition. 6 Similarly, the accumulation of the catabolic intermediates of aromatic amino acids (phenylalanine and tyrosine), especially fumarylacetoacetate, can be fatal in animals deficient in its degradation enzyme if left untreated. A number of inborn diseases of amino acid catabolism are caused by the accumulation of catabolic metabolites. The catabolism of amino acids typically takes place in the liver. Although cultured cells are not derived from individuals with inborn errors, the expression level of those catabolic enzymes in those cells may not be programmed to catabolize amino acids efficiently. At a very high cell concentration in the reactor, and with excessive feeding of amino acids, the catabolic products, both ammonium and reaction intermediates, may become growth inhibitory.

Lipid Metabolism
Lipid Transport L ipids serve many functions in the body. Phospholipids are critical components of the cell membrane, glycerides store energy, and sterols are not only constituents of the cell membrane but also hormones. Although their role in cultured cells is primarily as the constituent of cell membranes, they are also important in signaling, protein trafficking, and protein-membrane interactions (Panel 3.22). However, as cells grow and the membrane expands, lipids must be supplied at a sufficient rate through biosynthesis and media provision. A balanced lipid composition in the cellular membrane is important in maintaining cellular vitality. However, our understanding of the balanced state of cellular lipids is rather limited. The content of lipids in cell culture media varies widely, from high-serum-containing media that is rich in various lipids and lipoproteins to very lean media with only minimal amounts of lipid precursors, such as ethanolamine and a small number of fatty acids. Fatty acids and lipid precursors like ethanolamine may be directly dissolved in media. Most lipids are supplied as serum lipoproteins, conjugated to serum albumin, as liposomes, or as solubilized conjugates, such as sorbitol-fatty acid esters. Although some cells can be cultured in lipid-free media, most cell culture media contains some fatty acids and lipids.
Cellular uptake of lipids is mediated by receptors of the lipoprotein lipid carriers, by endocytosis of membrane vesicles, or by diffusion. Cells readily take up fatty acids, phospholipids, and cholesterol from the medium and incorporate them into cellular lipids. The cellular uptake of fatty acids is a passive, non-energy-dependent process. After being taken up by cells, fatty acids quickly become esters; the intracellular levels of free fatty acids are quite low. Cholesterol is complexed to low density lipoprotein (LDL) in the body and is taken up by cells through the LDL receptor. For cells in culture, cholesterol is often supplied as a conjugate with serum albumin, or as complexes with cyclodextrin.
The lipid composition in the bilayer membrane affects membrane fluidity and permeability. Not all lipid bilayer membranes are the same. The lipid composition of the outer leaflet and the inner leaflet of the cytoplasmic membrane, for example, differ from each other. The plasma membrane is enriched in cholesterol, while the amount of cholesterol in the ER and other organelles is much less. There is very little cholesterol in the inner mitochondrial membrane. After being taken up by cells, lipids have to be distributed to different organelles to give them distinctive membrane lipid compositions. Their transport is mediated by a number of lipid transport proteins or by membrane vesicles for those organelles.
After processing in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi apparatus, recombinant proteins are transported via membrane vesicles to the cytoplasmic membrane for secretion. Membrane homeostasis and organelle biogenesis, therefore, also affect the productivity of recombinant proteins. 

Fatty Acid Metabolism
Most cells have the capability of synthesizing various fatty acids. Under starvation conditions, cells also perform β-oxidation to degrade fatty acids into acetyl-CoA in the mitochondria or peroxisomes (Panel 3.23). Acetyl-CoA then enters the TCA cycle and generates energy.
Fatty acids are synthesized from acetyl-CoA in the cytosol. The first step of fatty acid synthesis involves adding a CO 2 to acetyl-CoA to form malonyl-CoA, which then reacts with acetyl-CoA to become a four-carbon fatty acyl-CoA. This is a case where CO 2 is an essential substrate for biosynthesis, not merely a catabolic product. Fatty acid synthesis, therefore, involves the step-wise elongation processes of using three-carbon malonyl-CoA to add a two-carbon unit to fatty acyl-CoA in each cycle. NADPH is also used to provide energy in this reductive synthesis reaction. There are a number of fatty acid synthetases that can synthesize fatty acids to different lengths.
The fatty acid products from elongation reactions are all saturated fatty acids. Double bonds are then synthesized by unsaturation reactions after saturated fatty acids have been made.

Cholesterol and Its Biosynthesis
Cholesterol is a 27-carbon molecule that has a hydrocarbon chain linked to aliphatic rings (Figure 3.19) . A hydroxyl group attached to the aliphatic ring allows it to interact with the head group of phospholipids while the hydrocarbon chain is well embedded in the membrane. Mammals require cholesterol as a constituent of cellular membranes and as a precursor for the synthesis of steroid hormones, bile acids, and lipoproteins (Panel 3.24). Cholesterol is relatively insoluble and resides exclusively in various cell membranes. Its regulation is particularly important since excess cholesterol forms solid crystals, leading to cell death.
Cholesterol constitutes ~10% of the dry weight of plasma membranes, and plasma membrane cholesterol accounts for 65% to 80% of total cellular cholesterol. Cells in culture obtain cholesterol either by de novo synthesis or through receptor-mediated uptake of exogenous lowdensity lipoproteins.
Cholesterol is synthesized from acetyl-CoA, which is condensed by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA synthase (HMGCS) to form HMG-CoA. HMG-CoA is converted to mevalonate by HMG-CoA (Figure 3.19b ). This enzyme is the target of statins, the class of drugs that suppresses cholesterol synthesis in patients. Further synthesis of mevalonate to farnesyldiphosphate takes place in peroxisomes. Subsequent condensation of two molecules of farnesyl diphosphate to form squalene, lanosterol, lathosterol, and finally cholesterol occurs in the ER.
Out of the 18 key enzymes taking part in cholesterol biosynthesis, 5 enzymes reside in the peroxisome and 13 reside in the ER. HMGCS is upstream of HMGCR and is found in the cytosol. Thus, there are at least three different sub-cellular compartments involved in cholesterol biosynthesis.
Although cholesterol in mammals is synthesized primarily in the liver, most cells have the capability of synthesizing cholesterol for their own growth requirements. NS0 cells lack an enzyme, 17-HSD, which converts lanosterol to lathosterol. In NS0 cells, 17-HSD is silenced through methylation of a CpG island upstream of its promoter, leading to the cell line's dependency on cholesterol for growth. 

Glycan Heterogeneity
A vast majority of recombinant therapeutic proteins are glycoproteins. These proteins have carbohydrates, in the form of branched oligosaccharides, attached to them. The glycosylation of proteins, along with disulfide bond formation, is the most common post-translational modification in recombinant protein products. Glycans are classified as O-linked or N-linked glycans (Panel 3.25). O-glycans attach to the polypeptide through the -OH group of serine or threonine. N-glycans link to protein through the amide group of asparagine. For N-linked glycans, the asparagine is in an Asn-X-Thr/Ser recognition sequence, where X indicates no specificity. For O-glycans, no specific recognition sequence is known.
The glycans attached to proteins are oligosaccharides of varying sizes. They are structurally heterogeneous (Panel 3.26). Glycans that attach to the same attachment site of different glycoprotein molecules often have different monosaccharide compositions and sequences. Even glycans of the same sequence may have different linkage bonds (glycosidic bonds) between monosaccharides. Such heterogeneity is called microheterogeneity.
Multiple and free sites; such differences in the occupancy of different attachment sites among protein molecules is called macroheterogeneity. The microheterogeneity and macroheterogeneity of glycoproteins give them complex glycosylation patterns. The diversity of glycans is seen on secreted glycoproteins in the human body's circulation, as well as on cell surface proteins. The glycan pattern (i.e., the distribution of abundance levels of different glycan structures) of a protein may vary at different developmental or disease states. In biomanufacturing, glycoproteins produced by the same cell line are also heterogeneous in their structure. However, for the manufacturing of therapeutic biologics the glycan profile is specified in the filing of the product for regulatory approval. Upon drug approval, the glycosylation pattern of the manufactured product must be within the range of specification. Those who wish to produce a biosimilar biologic after the patent of an innovative product expires must reproduce the protein with comparable or better (biobetter) quality with the acceptable glycan profile. The heterogeneity of glycans thus poses a special challenge for biosimilar production.

Major Types of N-Glycans
A few commonly seen N-glycans are shown in Figure 3 .20. A glycan is first formed in the ER, with 9 mannose extended from 2 N-acetylglucosamine. The 9 mannose is normally trimmed down to 3 and extended further. Glycans that are not trimmed and still have 5 or more mannose residues are called high mannose glycans. High mannose glycans are not abundant in humans, but appear prominently or even dominantly in Tetraantennary yeast, plants, and insects. They may cause an immunogenic response in humans. The trimmed mannose can then be extended to become a biantennary, triantennary, or tetraantennary glycan. These glycans, which are sometimes referred to as complex glycans, may be extended fully to have sialic acid at the terminal, or can be terminated sooner. Glycans with both untrimmed mannose and an antennary extending are called hybrid glycans. A glycan may be fucosylated or unfucosylated. The mannose at the base is extended to two antennaries through its C3 and C6 to two more mannoses. Sometimes the C4 of the mannose at the base is linked to a bisecting N-acetylglucosamine. Bisecting sugar will affect fucosylation and further glycan extension.
IgG molecules typically have simpler glycan structure with only two antennaries. After extending by an N-acetylglucosamine, it may be further galactosylated in 0 to 2 branches. These glycans with 0,1, or 2 galactose are referred to as G0, G1, and G2 structures.

Role of Glycans
The glycan structure on a glycoprotein affects its half-life in blood circulation and its immunogenicity. For IgG molecules, N-glycosylation in the Fc region affects their biological activities. The presence of glycans on interferon produced in mammalian cells prolongs its clearance from blood, as compared to its non-glycosylated counterpart produced in E. coli. Higher sialic acid content on erythropoietin (EPO) increases its circulation half-life. Under-sialylated glycoproteins are cleared by liver uptake via the hepatic asialoglycoprotein binding protein faster. It has been postulated that glycosylated recombinant proteins are better retained by the extracellular matrix, thus giving them a longer bioavailability in vivo than their unglycosylated variants.
Glycans on glycoproteins may also affect their biological activities. The effect of glycan structure on biological activities is relatively well understood in IgG. Many therapeutic antibody IgG molecules facilitate the killing of target cells through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC activities of those antibodies are affected by the glycan structure at position Asn 297 on the CH 2 domain in the Fc region of the IgG heavy chain. Unlike many other glycans on glycoproteins, which are often thought of as being "coated" on the exterior of proteins, the glycan at Asn 297 is in a "pocket" inside the folded IgG molecule. However, the glycan structure at Asn 297 affects the binding of IgG to the Fc receptor on the effector cells and its interactions with the complement component C1q. IgG molecules that do not have a fucose on their mannose core have a greater than 10-fold higher ADCC activity compared with those with a fucose. Bisection of the glycan on Asn 297 also appears to affect ADCC activity. However, bisection and afucosylation occur together, making their effects difficult to distinguish. The effects of galactosylation on IgG activity is less clear. However, a decrease in galactosylation has been related to some autoimmune diseases.

Protein Folding and Glycosylation in the ER
N-glycosylation starts while the protein molecule is still being translated and folded in the ER (Figure 3.21) . The translation and translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum of a protein molecule takes a finite amount of time. The translation rate is in the order of 10 amino acids per second. It takes about half a minute to synthesize an average protein and many minutes for a large protein like the heavy chain of IgG. During that period, protein molecules must be protected from misfolding or aggregation. Many chaperone proteins play important roles in the folding process. The addition of glycans to the protein facilitates the folding process (Panel 3.27). Glycans also serve as a quality control signal to ensure the molecules passed on to the Golgi apparatus for further processing are all properly folded.
N-glycosylation is initiated by the transfer of a preassembled oligosaccharide (Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 , an oligosaccharide of three glucose, nine mannose, and two N-acetylglucosamine) to the asparagine in a recognition sequence of a nascent protein in the ER lumen (Figure 3 .21). 7 The assembly of the high mannose backbone starts on the outside surface of the ER. The glycan is linked to a membrane-anchored dolichol carrier through a pyrophosphate group. After the seven-sugar backbone is formed (with five mannose and two N-acetyl glucosamine), it flips over to the interior of the ER. No transporters are needed for the transport of the backbone glycan; rather, a flippase catalyzes their translocation into the ER lumen. Once inside the ER, the backbone acquires an additional four mannose and three glucose to become a mature core. The mature core is then transferred to a binding site (Asn-X-Thr/Ser) on a nascent protein molecule. However, not all glycan binding sites may receive the core glycan. This might be due to competition between local protein folding, which could make the glycosylation site inaccessible and the transfer of the glycan core to the site impossible. Hence, on the same glycosylation site of a protein, some molecules may be occupied by a glycan while others may not.

PP
After translation, protein molecules are assisted by many chaperone molecules to undergo the folding process. The three glucose on the glycan core serve as a quality control signal for the proper folding of these glycoprotein molecules. The three glucose are quickly removed from the glycan to generate a monoglucosylated intermediate. But a glucosyltransferase quickly adds a glucose to any protein molecule that is not yet correctly folded. The presence of the monoglucosylated glycan signals the protein molecule liable to bind to the ER lectins calnexin and calreticulin, and the oxidoreductase ERp57. ERp57 facilitates the formation of disulfide, a critical step in protein folding. The folding process continues until the absence of the glucose residue allows the folded molecule to dissociate from the lectin. The "correctly" folded protein molecule is then transported to the Golgi apparatus by a membrane vesicle.
Misfolded proteins, with the de-glucosylated mannose exposed, are subjected to the removal of their terminal α1,2-bonded mannose. Trimming of the mannose then serves as the signal to divert the unfolded molecules to the ER disposal system, through which they are exported to a proteasome for degradation.
Well-folded glycoprotein molecules are enclosed in membrane vesicles of the ER, where they bud and then translocate to the Golgi apparatus. Once there, they fuse with the Golgi body membrane and the glycoprotein cargos are released into the lumen of the Golgi apparatus.

Glycan Extension in the Golgi Apparatus
Inside the Golgi, mannose is trimmed further from the N-glycan core, reducing the number of mannoses from nine to three to form the tri-mannosyl (Man 3 GlcNAc 2 ) core structure (Figure 3.22) . However, incomplete trimming does occur, leading to the synthesis of high-mannosetype glycans (Man 5-9 GlcNAc 2 ) ( Figure 3.20) . After mannose trimming, more monosaccharide units are added to the glycan one at a time. The extension of the glycan from the 3-mannose core creates complex-type glycans, while the extension from those with 4-5 mannose creates hybridtype glycans. Three monosaccharide units constitute most of the extended N-glycans: N-acetyl glucosamine, galactose, and sialic acid. Different glycosyltransferases are involved in these reactions. Each enzyme adds a different monosaccharaide and forms a specific glycosidic linkage to the growing core glycan. Each glycosidic bond is defined by the two sugars being linked and the position of the carbon on each sugar. The incoming monosaccharide provides the activated carbonyl group (by linking to a nucleotide), and the receiving carbohydrate moiety on the growing glycan on the protein provides a hydroxyl group for forming the glycosidic bond. For example, the two-terminal mannose residues each use its C1 (carbonyl carbon) to link to C3 and C6 of the base mannose, respectively (Figure 3.22) .
Each terminal mannose can be further extended by the addition of a N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc). The terminal receiving mannose has three hydroxyl groups, a pair of which (carbon 2 and carbon 4, or carbon 2 and carbon 6) can be extended by the addition of a GlcNAc. The extension reaction does not take place on all of the available reaction (receiving) sites. If one of each of the two-terminal mannoses of the Man 3 -GlcNAc 2 core are extended by the addition of a GlcNAc, it becomes a biantennary glycan (Figure 3.20) . If more than one hydroxyl group is extended on either one or both terminal mannoses, then the glycan becomes tri-or tetra-antennary. There are a number of different glycosyltransferases, each of which recognizes different pairs of incoming nucleotide sugars and substrate glycans, and which catalyzes the formation of different glycosidic bonds. A number of glycosyltransferases do allow for some flexibility in glycosidic bond formation. In mammals, some glycosyltransferases have a large number of isozymes. Their expression may be tissue-specific. Some isozymes are co-expressed in some cells. Roughly a couple dozen glycosyltransferases are prominent in contributing to the glycan heterogeneity in recombinant proteins.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Man GlcNAc Fuc Gal NANA NGNA ER N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Man GlcNAc Fuc Gal NANA
Each growing glycan, thus, has multiple available reaction paths for extension. Many of those different reaction paths will lead to different products (Figure 3.22) . However, in other cases, the reactions of adding sugars to different branches of the glycan may occur in different orders but lead to the same product. In the extension of the first layer GlcNAc to the 3-mannose core, the addition of GlcNAc to the base mannose (catalyzed by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III (GnT-III)) suppresses further extension of the glycan. This bisecting GlcNAc thus has a strong effect on glycan structure. The enzyme fucosyltransferase has the opposite effect of increasing structural diversity; it adds a fucose to the base sugar (GlcNAc), thus making two versions of most glycans, fucosylated or unfucosylated. Both the bisecting GlcNAc and the core fucose affect the biological activities of many protein molecules (e.g., the ADCC activity of IgG, and the binding of EGF to EGFR).
The web of glycan extension reactions forms a complex network which, when drawn out graphically, indeed resembles a network of diverging and converging paths leading to a number of different fully-extended N-glycan structures (Figure 3.23) . Adding to the complexity is the compartmentalization within the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membranous compartments commonly grouped into cis, medial, trans, and trans-Golgi network (TGN) cisternae. These cisternae are not biochemically homogeneous. The glycosyltransferase composition varies among different compartments, with the earlier enzymes more enriched in the early compartment and vice versa. As the secretory glycoproteins traverse through these Golgi compartments, the extension reactions will favor the addition of different glycans. An extending glycan that fails to acquire a particular sugar in an early compartment may thus not get extended further after moving on to a later compartment.
The reaction path for glycan extension in the Golgi apparatus is a rather long one. Protein molecules spend tens of minutes passing through the Golgi, but the residence time that each protein molecule spends in the Golgi is not uniform. Not all protein molecules will have fully extended glycans. In fact, often only a portion will be fully extended and Sialylation is rarely seen in the glycan on Asn 297 , but is more often seen in the one in the hypervariable region.
A very large number of glycan structures can be formed in the N-glycosylation pathway; typically only a fraction of all these possible configurations constitute the dominant types. The patterns of glycans on recombinant DNA proteins produced in different production cell lines but derived from the same host cell line are likely to be different. The pattern is also affected by different culture conditions.

O-Glycosylation
O-glycosylation is initiated in the endoplasmic reticulum or in the Golgi apparatus. Unlike N-glycosylation, which is initiated by the translocation of a preassembled core-oligoglycan (Man 9 Glc 3 ) to the nascent protein, O-glycosylation starts by adding monosaccharides directly to the protein and extends mostly through one-by-one addition of more sugars. There is no known consensus sequence for the addition of O-glycans to serine and threonine, although clusters of O-linked glycosylation are often seen in regions with a high density of serine/proline/threonine. The OHgroups of serine and threonine can be linked to glucose, N-acetylglucosamine, galactose, N-acetyl galactosamine, fucose, xylose, or mannose. O-glycans can thus be more complex and heterogeneous than N-glycans, because they lack the consensus attachment amino acid sequence and a single common core glycan structure. O-glycans are abundantly represented in some glycoproteins. The O-glycans seen in recombinant proteins are mostly of the mucin-type structure with an N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) as the first sugar. Etanercept (Embrel, a fusion protein of TNF α-Fc for rheumatoid arthritis treatment) has 3 N-glycosylation sites and 11 O-glycosylation sites. Most of those O-glycans are linked to serine/threonine through O-GalNAc, whereas in the O-glycan of factor VII, O-fucose and O-glucose are also seen (Figure 3.24) .
The attachment of N-acetylgalactosamine to the -OH group of serine/threonine is initiated by GalNAc-transferases. The presence of GalNAc recruits other enzymes to add more GalNAc to nearby serines/threonines. Subsequently, a number of enzymes catalyze the addition of different sugars (glucose, galactose, GalNAc) to form different core O-glycans. This is followed by core extension (e.g., by adding more galactose) and O-glycan capping (e.g., by the addition of sialic acid, fucose, or sulfate). Like N-glycosylation, various glycosyltransferases are locally enriched in different compartments of the Golgi apparatus. Some glycosyltransferases are probably shared with N-glycan biosynthesis. Like N-glycan synthesis, the formation of the different cores of O-glycans is affected by the relative abundance of different enzymes in the tissue or the cell. The addition and extension of different glycans is also affected by the protein domain structure, although our knowledge with respect to the effect of protein domain on glycosylation is still rather limited.

Synthesis and Transport of Nucleotide Sugar Precursors
The substrate for glycosidic bond formation by glycosyltransferase is a nucleotide sugar. The carbonyl carbon of the sugar is the carbon that will form the glycosidic bond. Before it can react with the glycan substrate, the carbonyl carbon of the sugar substrate (glucose 1-phosphate, galactose 1-phosphate, N-acetyl-glucosamine-phosphate, or mannose 1-phosphate) needs to be "activated" by reacting with a nucleotide (NTPs: UTP, CTP, GTP) to form NDP-sugar or CMP-sialic acid at the expense of an equivalent of 1 ATP. Different sugars are linked to different NDPs. Uracil is used for glucose-and galactose-based sugars (e.g., UDP-glucose and UDP-galactose), guanyl for mannose and fucose, and cytidyl for sialic acid.
Mannose, galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, and fucose are synthesized in branches of the glycolysis pathway (Figure 3.25) . All four sugars are activated at their first (carbonyl) carbon. Therefore, they link to glycans through the formation of (1→n) glycosidic bonds. For example, UDP-GlcNAc is added to a growing core by the formation of an N-acetylglucosamine β (1→n) mannose bond. The linkage can be through a number of possible carbons on mannose (e.g., 2, 3, 4, or 6) depending on the position of the mannose in the glycan. Upon giving away its sugar, an NMP is formed as the reaction product, and is transported back to the cytosol (Figure 3.25) .
Sialic acid is a generic name for the derivative of 9-carbon neuraminic acid and is also the name of the most commonly seen N-acetylneuraminic acids. The second carbon of neuraminic acid is activated; thus CMP-2-sialic acid will form a sialyl (2→n) bond with galactose. The synthesis of all the precursor sugars occurs in the cytosol, including a nine-carbon neuraminic acid and N-acetyl neuraminic acid. Similarly, all nucleotide sugars are formed in the cytosol, except for CMP-sialic acid. The activation of sialic acid to CMP-sialic acid occurs in the nucleus.
The backbone of N-linked glycan is synthesized on the cytosolic side of the ER membrane through the membrane-anchored dolichol. The nucleotide sugars used in the formation of the backbone, GDP-mannose and UDP-N-acetyl glucosamine, are synthesized in the cytosol and directly react with dolichol or with the growing glycan backbone. The assembled backbone is then "flipped" into the ER and the subsequent reactions occur inside the ER. Transporters are used to supply the nucleotide sugars involved in the subsequent reactions, including GDP-mannose and GDP-glucose in the ER.
The nucleotide sugars for the extension reactions in the Golgi apparatus are also transported through transporters (Figure 3.26) . These include CMP-sialic acid, GDP-fucose, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, UDP-galactose, and the activated sulfate donor (3′-phosphoadenosine, 5′-phosphosulfate). All of these transporters are antiporters, requiring an equal molar exchange of the import of nucleotide sugar and the export of the corresponding NMP (as a product of glycosyltransferase reactions) during the process.

Glycan Diversity among Species
A concern about recombinant protein therapy is the possible elicitation of immunogenicity. An antibody elicited by and against the protein therapeutic can result in neutralization of the therapeutic protein and may result in an unintended drop in efficacy, thus causing serious adverse clinical effects.
The potential immunogenicity of recombinant therapeutics may arise from an aglycosylated protein core or from the glycans associated with it. There are at least two mechanisms by which glycans on a protein may affect the immunogenicity of a human therapeutic: 1) by being a foreign glycan structure, or 2) by shielding a segment of the protein that is otherwise antibody inductive.
Recombinant human therapeutic proteins produced in different organisms or cells are often differently glycosylated (such as those from CHO versus yeast) or aglycosylated (such as from CHO versus E. coli) (Panel 3.28). 8 Comparison of those proteins indicates that the "shielding" effect of minimizing immunogenicity is affected by the nature of the protein as well as by the source of the protein. The concerns about the immunogenicity of different glycoforms of the rDNA proteins produced in insect cells and in transgenic plants has hindered those technologies' application for rDNA therapeutic protein production. Glycosylated proteins produced in CHO and mouse myeloma cells are minimally immunogenic. The glycosylation pathway is highly conserved in mammals. Nevertheless, divergence among different species is seen. Furthermore, the expression pattern of glycosylation genes in different tissues or in cells derived from different tissues is often different. Host cells derived from different species or from different tissues may produce recombinant proteins with different glycosylation patterns. For example, the sialic acid in glycans produced in animal cells can be different from that produced in human cells. Human glycans have terminal N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA). NANA can be further hydrolyzed to N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) in most other mammals. However, humans have a truncated CMP-sialic acid hydroxylase that renders it unfunctional. 9 Thus, glycoproteins produced in non-human cells have some NGNA that is not present in human glycoproteins. Similarly, glycoproteins expressed in CHO cells have only terminal α(2,3)-linked sialic acids, in contrast to α(2,6) and α(2,3) seen in humans, due to the near absence of expression of 2,6-sialyltransferase in CHO cells. Such differences in glycan composition have posed a concern; however, immunogenicity of recombinant proteins directly caused by variant glycans is still rare.
In the production of biosimilar biologics, a critical issue is the production of glycoproteins with "the same" glycoform distribution as the original innovative product. In almost all cases, the cell lines as well as the processes used for the production of the biosimilar are different from those employed in the production of the original innovative product. It is therefore a challenge to devise a robust process that can produce protein molecules with the desired or target glycosylation pattern. Many factors affect the glycosylation pattern of the product, including the expression pattern of glycosylation enzymes in the cell line, the nucleotide sugar supply, the cultivation conditions, and the metabolic state of the cells. The glycosylation pattern is also affected by signaling pathways and their modulators. Further complicating the issue is the fact that the glycosylation pathways in the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus are not only present to process product proteins, but also a very large fraction of all cellular proteins. Thus, the effect of modulating the pathway is not limited to the product protein but potentially includes other aspects of cell physiology. Due to the importance of glycoforms in the assessment of the quality of therapeutic proteins from a regulatory perspective, we will likely see growing efforts to better understand and control glycoforms in the near future.

Concluding Remarks
I n this chapter, we presented a brief overview of the broad areas of cellular metabolic processes. We covered the core of energy metabolism, the process of glucose utilization through glycolysis, the PPP, and the TCA cycle, and examined how all of these affect cell growth behavior and productivity. Through interconnected pathways, the central corridor of energy metabolism also influences the synthesis and glycosylation of the product proteins. The excessive consumption of glucose and glutamine and the corresponding accumulation of lactate and ammonium in culture contribute to growth inhibition and low productivity. Lactate consumption in the late stage of culture has been positively associated with a high productivity. There are, therefore, ample incentives to better understand cell metabolism and search for new ways of manipulating it that can better redirect the process. In recent years, we have developed a better understanding of the link between glycolytic regulation and growth control. We have also established better tools to probe the relationship between metabolic flux distribution and other aspects of phys-Introduction T he quality of the product is a most important aspect of manufacturing for products of therapeutic applications, even more so for biologics. The complex structures of those products make the quality determinants harder to quantify. Ensuring the manufacturing process produces these biologics of consistent quality is critical for the manufacturer as well as for the public. Manufacturing processes should be designed to robustly deliver consistent yields and product quality. Increasingly cells and viruses with even higher degrees of complexity than proteins are employed as therapeutic agents. Although gene and cell therapy products are still few, maintaining and monitoring the quality of these products will only become more crucial. The vast knowledge and experience of therapeutic protein manufacturing will help set the path forward for the development of manufacturing processes for these new products.
What constitutes product quality? Generally speaking, a product is established by its structural identity (Panel 4.1). Sometimes, structural variants of the product arise in the manufacturing process. 1 These must be controlled in the drug substance so as to restrict their levels to within acceptable limits. Most therapeutic proteins are glycoproteins whose glycans vary somewhat between individual protein molecules, but whose glycan heterogeneity must be within a certain bound. Inevitably, the product will have some contaminants, which must also fall within a set limit. Finally, the product must be tested and found biologically functional and safe before product release. The general quality requirements and characterization methods are detailed in Table 4 .1. The productivity of cell culture bioprocesses is currently very high. For many proteins, such as IgG, the titer in the reactor has exceeded the highest level in its native environment in vivo. At such high concentrations, physical interactions with other components may differ from those in older generation processes or those in vivo. These molecular interactions may pose challenges in protein aggregation or host cell protein contamination. The high productivity achieved nowadays is accomplished with a high cell concentration and often high-stress culture conditions such as high sugar content, high salt and waste metabolite concentration, and low temperature in the production bioreactor. Under more extreme culture conditions, the secreted product may be subject to chemical modifications as well as enzymatic modifications caused by enzymes released from dead cells. Some higher-order protein structural changes, such as aggregation or fragmentation, may even take place during the product recovery process. For some products, the productivity of the producing cell line has reached or even exceeded the secretion rate of professional secretors in the human body (e.g., liver cells and antibody-and insulinsecreting cells). It is unclear whether these hyperproducing cells, having been pushed to the limit of some of their functions related to protein synthesis and secretion, have exposed their product to a higher probability of deviation (e.g., a higher degree of heterogeneity in a glycan profile or a higher rate of amino acid misincorporation).
The first task in ensuring consistent product quality in manufacturing is the identification of the properties of a given product that play a key role in its safety and clinical efficacy. This is undertaken while the product is being developed, and the knowledge is applied while developing the process. In the manufacturing process, the product is made in bioreactors, purified through downstream steps, stored as a drug substance, and then converted to a drug product for use in clinical application. The operating conditions in production and downstream recovery that may lead to unsatisfactory product quality should then be identified and the controlled range of critical process parameters defined. After the product is launched, the product quality data is continually collected, compiled, and analyzed in order to better control product quality during the manufacturing process. The process of quality enhancement and process improvement thus continues throughout the product's life cycle.
This chapter will first discuss those chemical and physical properties of protein biologics which are important quality attributes. This will be followed by a discussion on Quality by Design (QbD), an approach to process development whereby the manufacturing process and controls are proactively designed to deliver the intended product. The last section emphasizes the importance of maintaining consistent product quality throughout the entire life cycle of the product.