Cholesterol constitutes ~10% of the dry weight of plasma membranes, and plasma membrane cholesterol accounts for 65% to 80% of total cellular cholesterol. Cells in culture obtain cholesterol either by de novo synthesis or through receptor-mediated uptake of exogenous lowdensity lipoproteins.
Cholesterol is synthesized from acetyl-CoA, which is condensed by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA synthase (HMGCS) to form HMG-CoA. HMG-CoA is converted to mevalonate by HMG-CoA (Figure 3.19b) . This enzyme is the target of statins, the class of drugs that suppresses cholesterol synthesis in patients. Further synthesis of mevalonate to farnesyldiphosphate takes place in peroxisomes. Subsequent condensation of two molecules of farnesyl diphosphate to form squalene, lanosterol, lathosterol, and finally cholesterol occurs in the ER.
Out of the 18 key enzymes taking part in cholesterol biosynthesis, 5 enzymes reside in the peroxisome and 13 reside in the ER. HMGCS is upstream of HMGCR and is found in the cytosol. Thus, there are at least three different sub-cellular compartments involved in cholesterol biosynthesis.
Although cholesterol in mammals is synthesized primarily in the liver, most cells have the capability of synthesizing cholesterol for their own growth requirements. NS0 cells lack an enzyme, 17-HSD, which converts lanosterol to lathosterol. In NS0 cells, 17-HSD is silenced through methylation of a CpG island upstream of its promoter, leading to the cell line's dependency on cholesterol for growth.
Glycan Heterogeneity.
A vast majority of recombinant therapeutic proteins are glycoproteins. These proteins have carbohydrates, in the form of branched oligosaccharides, attached to them. The glycosylation of proteins, along with disulfide bond formation, is the most common post-translational modification in recombinant protein products. Glycans are classified as O-linked or N-linked glycans (Panel 3.25). O-glycans attach to the polypeptide through the -OH group of serine or threonine. N-glycans link to protein through the amide group of asparagine. For N-linked glycans, the asparagine is in an Asn-X-Thr/Ser recognition sequence, where X indicates no specificity. For O-glycans, no specific recognition sequence is known.
The glycans attached to proteins are oligosaccharides of varying sizes. They are structurally heterogeneous (Panel 3.26). Glycans that attach to the same attachment site of different glycoprotein molecules often have different monosaccharide compositions and sequences. Even glycans of the same sequence may have different linkage bonds (glycosidic bonds) between monosaccharides. Such heterogeneity is called microheterogeneity.
Multiple and free sites; such differences in the occupancy of different attachment sites among protein molecules is called macroheterogeneity. The microheterogeneity and macroheterogeneity of glycoproteins give them complex glycosylation patterns. The diversity of glycans is seen on secreted glycoproteins in the human body's circulation, as well as on cell surface proteins. The glycan pattern (i.e., the distribution of abundance levels of different glycan structures) of a protein may vary at different developmental or disease states. In biomanufacturing, glycoproteins produced by the same cell line are also heterogeneous in their structure. However, for the manufacturing of therapeutic biologics the glycan profile is specified in the filing of the product for regulatory approval. Upon drug approval, the glycosylation pattern of the manufactured product must be within the range of specification. Those who wish to produce a biosimilar biologic after the patent of an innovative product expires must reproduce the protein with comparable or better (biobetter) quality with the acceptable glycan profile. The heterogeneity of glycans thus poses a special challenge for biosimilar production.
Major Types of N-Glycans.
A few commonly seen N-glycans are shown in Figure 3 .20. A glycan is first formed in the ER, with 9 mannose extended from 2 N-acetylglucosamine. The 9 mannose is normally trimmed down to 3 and extended further. Glycans that are not trimmed and still have 5 or more mannose residues are called high mannose glycans. High mannose glycans are not abundant in humans, but appear prominently or even dominantly in Tetraantennary yeast, plants, and insects. They may cause an immunogenic response in humans. The trimmed mannose can then be extended to become a biantennary, triantennary, or tetraantennary glycan. These glycans, which are sometimes referred to as complex glycans, may be extended fully to have sialic acid at the terminal, or can be terminated sooner. Glycans with both untrimmed mannose and an antennary extending are called hybrid glycans. A glycan may be fucosylated or unfucosylated. The mannose at the base is extended to two antennaries through its C3 and C6 to two more mannoses. Sometimes the C4 of the mannose at the base is linked to a bisecting N-acetylglucosamine. Bisecting sugar will affect fucosylation and further glycan extension.
IgG molecules typically have simpler glycan structure with only two antennaries. After extending by an N-acetylglucosamine, it may be further galactosylated in 0 to 2 branches. These glycans with 0,1, or 2 galactose are referred to as G0, G1, and G2 structures.
Role of Glycans.
The glycan structure on a glycoprotein affects its half-life in blood circulation and its immunogenicity. For IgG molecules, N-glycosylation in the Fc region affects their biological activities. The presence of glycans on interferon produced in mammalian cells prolongs its clearance from blood, as compared to its non-glycosylated counterpart produced in E. coli. Higher sialic acid content on erythropoietin (EPO) increases its circulation half-life. Under-sialylated glycoproteins are cleared by liver uptake via the hepatic asialoglycoprotein binding protein faster. It has been postulated that glycosylated recombinant proteins are better retained by the extracellular matrix, thus giving them a longer bioavailability in vivo than their unglycosylated variants.
Glycans on glycoproteins may also affect their biological activities. The effect of glycan structure on biological activities is relatively well understood in IgG. Many therapeutic antibody IgG molecules facilitate the killing of target cells through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC activities of those antibodies are affected by the glycan structure at position Asn 297 on the CH 2 domain in the Fc region of the IgG heavy chain. Unlike many other glycans on glycoproteins, which are often thought of as being "coated" on the exterior of proteins, the glycan at Asn 297 is in a "pocket" inside the folded IgG molecule. However, the glycan structure at Asn 297 affects the binding of IgG to the Fc receptor on the effector cells and its interactions with the complement component C1q. IgG molecules that do not have a fucose on their mannose core have a greater than 10-fold higher ADCC activity compared with those with a fucose. Bisection of the glycan on Asn 297 also appears to affect ADCC activity. However, bisection and afucosylation occur together, making their effects difficult to distinguish. The effects of galactosylation on IgG activity is less clear. However, a decrease in galactosylation has been related to some autoimmune diseases.
Protein Folding and Glycosylation in the ER.
N-glycosylation starts while the protein molecule is still being translated and folded in the ER (Figure 3.21) . The translation and translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum of a protein molecule takes a finite amount of time. The translation rate is in the order of 10 amino acids per second. It takes about half a minute to synthesize an average protein and many minutes for a large protein like the heavy chain of IgG. During that period, protein molecules must be protected from misfolding or aggregation. Many chaperone proteins play important roles in the folding process. The addition of glycans to the protein facilitates the folding process (Panel 3.27). Glycans also serve as a quality control signal to ensure the molecules passed on to the Golgi apparatus for further processing are all properly folded. N-glycosylation is initiated by the transfer of a preassembled oligosaccharide (Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 , an oligosaccharide of three glucose, nine mannose, and two N-acetylglucosamine) to the asparagine in a recognition sequence of a nascent protein in the ER lumen (Figure 3 .21). 7 The assembly of the high mannose backbone starts on the outside surface of the ER. The glycan is linked to a membrane-anchored dolichol carrier through a pyrophosphate group. After the seven-sugar backbone is formed (with five mannose and two N-acetyl glucosamine), it flips over to the interior of the ER. No transporters are needed for the transport of the backbone glycan; rather, a flippase catalyzes their translocation into the ER lumen. Once inside the ER, the backbone acquires an additional four mannose and three glucose to become a mature core. The mature core is then transferred to a binding site (Asn-X-Thr/Ser) on a nascent protein molecule. However, not all glycan binding sites may receive the core glycan. This might be due to competition between local protein folding, which could make the glycosylation site inaccessible and the transfer of the glycan core to the site impossible. Hence, on the same glycosylation site of a protein, some molecules may be occupied by a glycan while others may not.
PP.
After translation, protein molecules are assisted by many chaperone molecules to undergo the folding process. The three glucose on the glycan core serve as a quality control signal for the proper folding of these glycoprotein molecules. The three glucose are quickly removed from the glycan to generate a monoglucosylated intermediate. But a glucosyltransferase quickly adds a glucose to any protein molecule that is not yet correctly folded. The presence of the monoglucosylated glycan signals the protein molecule liable to bind to the ER lectins calnexin and calreticulin, and the oxidoreductase ERp57. ERp57 facilitates the formation of disulfide, a critical step in protein folding. The folding process continues until the absence of the glucose residue allows the folded molecule to dissociate from the lectin. The "correctly" folded protein molecule is then transported to the Golgi apparatus by a membrane vesicle.
Misfolded proteins, with the de-glucosylated mannose exposed, are subjected to the removal of their terminal α1,2-bonded mannose. Trimming of the mannose then serves as the signal to divert the unfolded molecules to the ER disposal system, through which they are exported to a proteasome for degradation.
Well-folded glycoprotein molecules are enclosed in membrane vesicles of the ER, where they bud and then translocate to the Golgi apparatus. Once there, they fuse with the Golgi body membrane and the glycoprotein cargos are released into the lumen of the Golgi apparatus.
Glycan Extension in the Golgi Apparatus.
Inside the Golgi, mannose is trimmed further from the N-glycan core, reducing the number of mannoses from nine to three to form the tri-mannosyl (Man 3 GlcNAc 2 ) core structure (Figure 3.22) . However, incomplete trimming does occur, leading to the synthesis of high-mannosetype glycans (Man 5-9 GlcNAc 2 ) ( Figure 3.20) . After mannose trimming, more monosaccharide units are added to the glycan one at a time. The extension of the glycan from the 3-mannose core creates complex-type glycans, while the extension from those with 4-5 mannose creates hybridtype glycans. Three monosaccharide units constitute most of the extended N-glycans: N-acetyl glucosamine, galactose, and sialic acid. Different glycosyltransferases are involved in these reactions. Each enzyme adds a different monosaccharaide and forms a specific glycosidic linkage to the growing core glycan. Each glycosidic bond is defined by the two sugars being linked and the position of the carbon on each sugar. The incoming monosaccharide provides the activated carbonyl group (by linking to a nucleotide), and the receiving carbohydrate moiety on the growing glycan on the protein provides a hydroxyl group for forming the glycosidic bond. For example, the two-terminal mannose residues each use its C1 (carbonyl carbon) to link to C3 and C6 of the base mannose, respectively (Figure 3.22) .
Each terminal mannose can be further extended by the addition of a N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc). The terminal receiving mannose has three hydroxyl groups, a pair of which (carbon 2 and carbon 4, or carbon 2 and carbon 6) can be extended by the addition of a GlcNAc. The extension reaction does not take place on all of the available reaction (receiving) sites. If one of each of the two-terminal mannoses of the Man 3 -GlcNAc 2 core are extended by the addition of a GlcNAc, it becomes a biantennary glycan (Figure 3.20) . If more than one hydroxyl group is extended on either one or both terminal mannoses, then the glycan becomes tri-or tetra-antennary. There are a number of different glycosyltransferases, each of which recognizes different pairs of incoming nucleotide sugars and substrate glycans, and which catalyzes the formation of different glycosidic bonds. A number of glycosyltransferases do allow for some flexibility in glycosidic bond formation. In mammals, some glycosyltransferases have a large number of isozymes. Their expression may be tissue-specific. Some isozymes are co-expressed in some cells. Roughly a couple dozen glycosyltransferases are prominent in contributing to the glycan heterogeneity in recombinant proteins.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Man GlcNAc Fuc Gal NANA NGNA ER N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Man GlcNAc Fuc Gal NANA.
Each growing glycan, thus, has multiple available reaction paths for extension. Many of those different reaction paths will lead to different products (Figure 3.22) . However, in other cases, the reactions of adding sugars to different branches of the glycan may occur in different orders but lead to the same product. In the extension of the first layer GlcNAc to the 3-mannose core, the addition of GlcNAc to the base mannose (catalyzed by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III (GnT-III)) suppresses further extension of the glycan. This bisecting GlcNAc thus has a strong effect on glycan structure. The enzyme fucosyltransferase has the opposite effect of increasing structural diversity; it adds a fucose to the base sugar (GlcNAc), thus making two versions of most glycans, fucosylated or unfucosylated. Both the bisecting GlcNAc and the core fucose affect the biological activities of many protein molecules (e.g., the ADCC activity of IgG, and the binding of EGF to EGFR).
The web of glycan extension reactions forms a complex network which, when drawn out graphically, indeed resembles a network of diverging and converging paths leading to a number of different fully-extended N-glycan structures (Figure 3.23) . Adding to the complexity is the compartmentalization within the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membranous compartments commonly grouped into cis, medial, trans, and trans-Golgi network (TGN) cisternae. These cisternae are not biochemically homogeneous. The glycosyltransferase composition varies among different compartments, with the earlier enzymes more enriched in the early compartment and vice versa. As the secretory glycoproteins traverse through these Golgi compartments, the extension reactions will favor the addition of different glycans. An extending glycan that fails to acquire a particular sugar in an early compartment may thus not get extended further after moving on to a later compartment.
The reaction path for glycan extension in the Golgi apparatus is a rather long one. Protein molecules spend tens of minutes passing through the Golgi, but the residence time that each protein molecule spends in the Golgi is not uniform. Not all protein molecules will have fully extended glycans. In fact, often only a portion will be fully extended and Sialylation is rarely seen in the glycan on Asn 297 , but is more often seen in the one in the hypervariable region.
A very large number of glycan structures can be formed in the N-glycosylation pathway; typically only a fraction of all these possible configurations constitute the dominant types. The patterns of glycans on recombinant DNA proteins produced in different production cell lines but derived from the same host cell line are likely to be different. The pattern is also affected by different culture conditions.
O-Glycosylation.
O-glycosylation is initiated in the endoplasmic reticulum or in the Golgi apparatus. Unlike N-glycosylation, which is initiated by the translocation of a preassembled core-oligoglycan (Man 9 Glc 3 ) to the nascent protein, O-glycosylation starts by adding monosaccharides directly to the protein and extends mostly through one-by-one addition of more sugars. There is no known consensus sequence for the addition of O-glycans to serine and threonine, although clusters of O-linked glycosylation are often seen in regions with a high density of serine/proline/threonine. The OHgroups of serine and threonine can be linked to glucose, N-acetylglucosamine, galactose, N-acetyl galactosamine, fucose, xylose, or mannose. O-glycans can thus be more complex and heterogeneous than N-glycans, because they lack the consensus attachment amino acid sequence and a single common core glycan structure. O-glycans are abundantly represented in some glycoproteins. The O-glycans seen in recombinant proteins are mostly of the mucin-type structure with an N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) as the first sugar. Etanercept (Embrel, a fusion protein of TNF α-Fc for rheumatoid arthritis treatment) has 3 N-glycosylation sites and 11 O-glycosylation sites. Most of those O-glycans are linked to serine/threonine through O-GalNAc, whereas in the O-glycan of factor VII, O-fucose and O-glucose are also seen (Figure 3.24) .
The attachment of N-acetylgalactosamine to the -OH group of serine/threonine is initiated by GalNAc-transferases. The presence of GalNAc recruits other enzymes to add more GalNAc to nearby serines/threonines. Subsequently, a number of enzymes catalyze the addition of different sugars (glucose, galactose, GalNAc) to form different core O-glycans. This is followed by core extension (e.g., by adding more galactose) and O-glycan capping (e.g., by the addition of sialic acid, fucose, or sulfate). Like N-glycosylation, various glycosyltransferases are locally enriched in different compartments of the Golgi apparatus. Some glycosyltransferases are probably shared with N-glycan biosynthesis. Like N-glycan synthesis, the formation of the different cores of O-glycans is affected by the relative abundance of different enzymes in the tissue or the cell. The addition and extension of different glycans is also affected by the protein domain structure, although our knowledge with respect to the effect of protein domain on glycosylation is still rather limited.
Synthesis and Transport of Nucleotide Sugar Precursors.
The substrate for glycosidic bond formation by glycosyltransferase is a nucleotide sugar. The carbonyl carbon of the sugar is the carbon that will form the glycosidic bond. Before it can react with the glycan substrate, the carbonyl carbon of the sugar substrate (glucose 1-phosphate, galactose 1-phosphate, N-acetyl-glucosamine-phosphate, or mannose 1-phosphate) needs to be "activated" by reacting with a nucleotide (NTPs: UTP, CTP, GTP) to form NDP-sugar or CMP-sialic acid at the expense of an equivalent of 1 ATP. Different sugars are linked to different NDPs. Uracil is used for glucose-and galactose-based sugars (e.g., UDP-glucose and UDP-galactose), guanyl for mannose and fucose, and cytidyl for sialic acid.
Mannose, galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, and fucose are synthesized in branches of the glycolysis pathway (Figure 3.25) . All four sugars are activated at their first (carbonyl) carbon. Therefore, they link to glycans through the formation of (1→n) glycosidic bonds. For example, UDP-GlcNAc is added to a growing core by the formation of an N-acetylglucosamine β (1→n) mannose bond. The linkage can be through a number of possible carbons on mannose (e.g., 2, 3, 4, or 6) depending on the position of the mannose in the glycan. Upon giving away its sugar, an NMP is formed as the reaction product, and is transported back to the cytosol (Figure 3.25) .
Sialic acid is a generic name for the derivative of 9-carbon neuraminic acid and is also the name of the most commonly seen N-acetylneuraminic acids. The second carbon of neuraminic acid is activated; thus CMP-2-sialic acid will form a sialyl (2→n) bond with galactose. The synthesis of all the precursor sugars occurs in the cytosol, including a nine-carbon neuraminic acid and N-acetyl neuraminic acid. Similarly, all nucleotide sugars are formed in the cytosol, except for CMP-sialic acid. The activation of sialic acid to CMP-sialic acid occurs in the nucleus.
The backbone of N-linked glycan is synthesized on the cytosolic side of the ER membrane through the membrane-anchored dolichol. The nucleotide sugars used in the formation of the backbone, GDP-mannose and UDP-N-acetyl glucosamine, are synthesized in the cytosol and directly react with dolichol or with the growing glycan backbone. The effect of minimizing immunogenicity is affected by the nature of the protein as well as by the source of the protein. The concerns about the immunogenicity of different glycoforms of the rDNA proteins produced in insect cells and in transgenic plants has hindered those technologies' application for rDNA therapeutic protein production. Glycosylated proteins produced in CHO and mouse myeloma cells are minimally immunogenic. The glycosylation pathway is highly conserved in mammals. Nevertheless, divergence among different species is seen. Furthermore, the expression pattern of glycosylation genes in different tissues or in cells derived from different tissues is often different. Host cells derived from different species or from different tissues may produce recombinant proteins with different glycosylation patterns. For example, the sialic acid in glycans produced in animal cells can be different from that produced in human cells. Human glycans have terminal N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA). NANA can be further hydrolyzed to N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) in most other mammals. However, humans have a truncated CMP-sialic acid hydroxylase that renders it unfunctional. 9 Thus, glycoproteins produced in non-human cells have some NGNA that is not present in human glycoproteins. Similarly, glycoproteins expressed in CHO cells have only terminal α(2,3)-linked sialic acids, in contrast to α(2,6) and α(2,3) seen in humans, due to the near absence of expression of 2,6-sialyltransferase in CHO cells. Such differences in glycan composition have posed a concern; however, immunogenicity of recombinant proteins directly caused by variant glycans is still rare.
In the production of biosimilar biologics, a critical issue is the production of glycoproteins with "the same" glycoform distribution as the original innovative product. In almost all cases, the cell lines as well as the processes used for the production of the biosimilar are different from those employed in the production of the original innovative product. It is therefore a challenge to devise a robust process that can produce protein molecules with the desired or target glycosylation pattern. Many factors affect the glycosylation pattern of the product, including the expression pattern of glycosylation enzymes in the cell line, the nucleotide sugar supply, the cultivation conditions, and the metabolic state of the cells. The glycosylation pattern is also affected by signaling pathways and their modulators. Further complicating the issue is the fact that the glycosylation pathways in the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus are not only present to process product proteins, but also a very large fraction of all cellular proteins. Thus, the effect of modulating the pathway is not limited to the product protein but potentially includes other aspects of cell physiology. Due to the importance of glycoforms in the assessment of the quality of therapeutic proteins from a regulatory perspective, we will likely see growing efforts to better understand and control glycoforms in the near future.
Concluding Remarks.
I n this chapter, we presented a brief overview of the broad areas of cellular metabolic processes. We covered the core of energy metabolism, the process of glucose utilization through glycolysis, the PPP, and the TCA cycle, and examined how all of these affect cell growth behavior and productivity. Through interconnected pathways, the central corridor of energy metabolism also influences the synthesis and glycosylation of the product proteins. The excessive consumption of glucose and glutamine and the corresponding accumulation of lactate and ammonium in culture contribute to growth inhibition and low productivity. Lactate consumption in the late stage of culture has been positively associated with a high productivity. There are, therefore, ample incentives to better understand cell metabolism and search for new ways of manipulating it that can better redirect the process. In recent years, we have developed a better understanding of the link between glycolytic regulation and growth control. We have also established better tools to probe the relationship between metabolic flux distribution and other aspects of physiology that influence both productivity and product quality. With the benefit of global physiological perspectives, we continue to gain a deeper understanding of metabolism. Global views at a systemic level will significantly enhance our capacity to manipulate cell metabolism and thus increase productivity and product quality.
annex.
assembled backbone is then "flipped" into the ER and the subsequent reactions occur inside the ER. Transporters are used to supply the nucleotide sugars involved in the subsequent reactions, including GDP-mannose and GDP-glucose in the ER.The nucleotide sugars for the extension reactions in the Golgi apparatus are also transported through transporters (Figure 3 .26). These include CMP-sialic acid, GDP-fucose, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, UDP-galactose, and the activated sulfate donor (3′-phosphoadenosine, 5′-phosphosulfate). All of these transporters are antiporters, requiring an equal molar exchange of the import of nucleotide sugar and the export of the corresponding NMP (as a product of glycosyltransferase reactions) during the process.
Glycan Diversity among Species.
A concern about recombinant protein therapy is the possible elicitation of immunogenicity. An antibody elicited by and against the protein therapeutic can result in neutralization of the therapeutic protein and may result in an unintended drop in efficacy, thus causing serious adverse clinical effects.The potential immunogenicity of recombinant therapeutics may arise from an aglycosylated protein core or from the glycans associated with it. There are at least two mechanisms by which glycans on a protein may affect the immunogenicity of a human therapeutic: 1) by being a foreign glycan structure, or 2) by shielding a segment of the protein that is otherwise antibody inductive.Recombinant human therapeutic proteins produced in different organisms or cells are often differently glycosylated (such as those from CHO versus yeast) or aglycosylated (such as from CHO versus E. coli) (Panel 3.28). 8 Comparison of those proteins indicates that the "shielding".
