Glucose Anaerobic Metabolism.
Abstract.
Glutamine Oxidation CO(NH 2) • CH 2 • CH 2 • CH (NH 2) • COOH (glutamine) + 4.5 O 2 → 2 NH 3 + 5 CO 2 + 2 H 2 O.
Introduction.
C ells in culture take up sugar, amino acids, lipids, and nucleosides from their growth medium. They metabolize these compounds to derive energy and use them to generate more cell mass, divide into more cells, and produce products. Proteins, which are polymers of amino acids connected by peptide bonds, constitute over 50% of the dry mass in a typical cell. Protein synthesis is an energetically costly process. Each peptide bond costs at least 3 ATP, which is nearly 1/10 of the energy generated by the oxidization of one glucose. A high-producing recombinant cell may produce over 40 pg per day of IgG protein. Each cell has about 400 pg of cell mass (or about 200 pg of cellular proteins) and can double its biomass in a day. The production of protein products is therefore a major energetic load for cells.
A classic cell culture medium contains 2-5 g/L of glucose, and somewhat lower levels of amino acids (about 0.8 mM, or 1 g/L). The consumption of these nutrients typically generates only about 2-5 x 10 9 cells/L, or approximately 0.2-0.5 g/L of cell dry mass. The efficiency of producing cell mass from glucose and other nutrients is rather low.
Glucose is the most important source of energy for most cells. Cultured cells also consume a significant quantity of glutamine, second only to glucose. The pathway for glucose metabolism (called glycolysis) is a key metabolic pathway and is virtually identical in all mammals. The same pathway, with a couple of additional entry reactions, is used when another sugar, such as galactose or fructose, is used as the carbohydrate source.
The complete oxidation of one glucose molecule consumes 6 O 2 and generates 6 H 2 O and 6 CO 2 (Panel 3.1). The complete oxidation of glutamine uses 4.5 O 2 and produces 2 H 2 O and 5 CO 2 . For cells in culture, however, the majority of consumed glucose is not completely oxidized; rather, it is converted to lactate and excreted. By converting to lactate instead of completely oxidizing to CO 2 , much less energy is derived from each mole of glucose. This is the root cause of the low efficiency in the production of cell mass from glucose. This type of "wasteful" metabolism is common to almost all vertebrate cells in culture. For bioprocessing, the accumulation of metabolic byproducts inhibits cell growth and impedes productivity.
Cells invariably produce lactate from glucose when growing rapidly. However, under some conditions (e.g., in the stationary phase of fedbatch culture), lactate may also be consumed. It is not unusual that under seemingly identical culture conditions using the same cell line and the same standard operating protocols, cells may have different metabolic behaviors. In some runs, lactate is produced throughout the fed-batch culture, from the rapid growth phase until the stationary phase. But in other runs, lactate production in the exponential growth phase switches to lactate consumption in the stationary phase.
When the metabolic behavior of a cell culture process fluctuates, it is commonly seen that the high productivity runs switch from lactate production to lactate consumption, while low productivity runs remain in lactate production mode throughout the culture (Figure 3 .1). Such observations attest to the importance of cell metabolism in influencing productivity. This chapter discusses the biochemical pathways that are of the utmost importance to cells in culture.
Glucose and Energy Metabolism.
G lucose is mainly catabolized through three pathways: glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (Panel 3.2) . In glycolysis, one mole of glucose is converted into two moles of pyruvate. In this segment of catabolism, only a small fraction of the chemical potential energy of glucose is converted into the "usable" form of chemical potential energy in the cell (i.e., ATP). Two moles each of ATP and NADH are generated from each mole of glucose.
Pyruvate may enter the TCA cycle for further oxidation, or it may become a shunted product as lactic acid (at a neutral pH it exists as lactate). During the TCA cycle, the carbon skeleton of glucose is finally broken down into CO 2 . PPP is a shunt from glycolysis. It generates five-carbon sugars for nucleoside synthesis and supplies NADPH for many biosynthesis reactions and to maintain a balanced redox state in the cell.
In eukaryotic cells, glycolysis and PPP take place in the cytosol, while the further oxidation of pyruvate to CO 2 occurs in the mitochondria. It is in the mitochondria that the majority of the chemical potential energy of glucose is converted to ATP for use in cellular synthesis and other energy-dependent cellular processes.
Glycolysis.
Glucose from the medium is imported into cells via the glucose transporter. During glycolysis, high-energy compounds (ATP and NADH) are generated. However, the first segment of glycolysis actually consumes two ATP for each glucose (Figure 3 .2, Panel 3.3). The two ATP are used to add a phosphate group to each end of the glucose molecule. The first phosphorylation converts glucose to glucose 6-phosphate (G6P). After isomerization to fructose 6-phosphate (F6P), the second The three runs with high product titers (dark gray) and low product titers (light gray) are shown. Lactate was produced and accumulated, and then either continued to increase or was consumed. The ammonium concentration profile was similar among all six runs. The lactate profile correlates to productivity, but not ammonium. Figure 3 .2. Glycolysis pathway. Only the chemical species are shown, not their stoichiometric relationships. The abbreviation of each compound is also shown. One mole of glucose yields two moles of pyruvate.
• Each mole of glucose -Consumes 2 moles of ATP (to activate glucose to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate) -Produces 2 moles of NADH, 4 moles of ATP (by converting F16P 2 to 2 moles of pyruvate) • Net:.
-Produces 2 pyruvate -Produces 2 ATP, 2 NADH -Requires 2 ADP, 2 NAD, plus glucose as reactants Panel 3.3. Glycolysis phosphate is added to give fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (F16BP). The two phosphate groups, being nucleophilic centers, help pull their surrounding electron clouds toward the two ends of the molecule, thereby making the carbon-carbon bond in the middle of the glucose molecule susceptible to enzymatic cleavage ( Figure 3 .3). The six-carbon F16BP becomes two threecarbon compounds: glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GAP) and dihydroxyacetone-phosphate (DHAP). These two compounds are interconvertible through a reversible reaction. The continued utilization of GAP toward downstream reactions effectively draws DHAP toward GAP. The original 1 mole of glucose now becomes 2 moles of GAP and moves further downstream in glycolysis. The conversion of 2 GAP to the end product of 2 pyruvates also converts 2 NAD + and 4 ADP to 2 NADH and 4 ATP. The net energetic consequence of the conversion of glucose to 2 pyruvate in glycolysis is the generation of 2 ATP (recall 2 ATP are consumed to activate glucose) and 2 NADH. Note that NAD + is often denoted as NAD in the text.
TCA cycle.
The further oxidation of pyruvate takes place in the mitochondria. After passing through a transporter and entering the mitochondrial matrix, pyruvate is first decarboxylated to become acetyl-CoA while releasing 1 CO 2 (Figure 3 .4a). The decarboxylation reaction breaks a carbon-carbon (C -C) bond. The energy of the C -C bond is preserved in the 1 NADH generated and in the high energy bond of acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is then fed into the TCA cycle where it is broken down into 2 CO 2 after going through one round of the TCA cycle. The pathway is cyclic, with four-to six-carbon skeletons cycling in a loop (Figure 3.4a) . At the beginning of the cycle, acetyl-CoA uses its high energy bond to form a new C -C bond on the four-carbon oxaloacetate (OAA) to become six-carbon citrate. Citrate has three carboxylic acid groups, hence.
ASCT2.
Asn Asn the name "tricarboxylic acid cycle" (Panel 3.4). The TCA cycle is also known as the citric acid cycle and the Krebs cycle. The structure of citrate and some other TCA cycle intermediates and their derived amino acids are shown in Figure 3 .5.
The 6 carbon atoms in glucose which enter the mitochondria as 2 pyruvate are converted into 6 CO 2 after one round of the TCA cycle. This is as seen in the oxidation reaction of glucose, where 1 mole of glucose generates 6 moles of CO 2 (Panel 3.1). However, no molecular oxygen participates in any reaction in glycolysis or the TCA cycle. The 6 CO 2 are released through decarboxylation reactions; they are derived from the carbon skeleton of pyruvate, citrate, and α-ketoglutarate without the participation of molecular oxygen. In two of these reactions, the carboxylic acid group next to a 2-keto group is released (catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase) and the energy from the breakup of the CO -COObond is preserved in the high-energy compounds acyl-CoA (acetyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA, respectively) and NADH. In the other case, the isocitrate dehydrogenase reaction, one of the three carboxylic acid groups in isocitrate is released and 1 NADH is generated. In the second half of the TCA cycle, succinyl-CoA is further oxidized to regenerate OAA via fumarate and malate and to preserve the chemical potential energy in NADH, FADH 2 , and GTP.
Electron transfer and oxidative phosphorylation.
In the oxidation of glucose, if the C -C bond is broken by directly reacting with oxygen, as in the case of the combustion of coal or wood, a very high temperature is necessary to provide the activation energy needed to trigger the reaction. Furthermore, the chemical potential energy in the C -C bond would be released as heat. Cells utilize decarboxylation reactions to break C -C bonds and release CO 2 while preserving the chemical potential energy in NADH. Oxygen is thereby used to extract the chemical potential energy from NADH and FADH 2 in order to generate ATP that can be used in cellular work. A total of 6 oxygens participate in the oxidation of the NADH/ FADH 2 generated in glucose oxidation, thus accounting for the 6 O 2 required to oxidize 1 glucose as shown in the stoichiometric equation of glucose oxidation (Panel 3.1). This process of transferring chemical potential energy from NADH to ATP and reacting with oxygen is carried out using electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos).
Extraction of the chemical potential energy of NADH and FADH 2 takes place through an electron transfer chain residing in the mitochondrial inner membrane (Panel 3.5). The high-energy electrons of NADH and FADH 2 enter the electron transport chain to move down the energy ladder, mediated by electron carriers including flavin, the iron-sulfur complex, heme, and copper ions which are embedded in a number of large enzyme complexes such as NADH dehydrogenase. At the end of the electron transfer chain, the electron is received by oxygen which then reacts with a proton to form H 2 O (Figure 3 .4b).
The energy released is then used to trigger a proton pump to drive H + out of the mitochondrial inner membrane. The export of H + from the mitochondrion creates a ~1.0 unit pH difference across the membrane, as well as about −120 mV of electric potential. Because of the higher pH (lower proton concentration) and excessive negative charge inside the mitochondrial membrane, there is a propensity for the proton ions outside the mitochondrion to cross the mitochondrial membrane and enter the mitochondrial matrix. The proton ion enters the mitochondrion through an ATP synthase embedded in the mitochondrion's inner membrane. While protons pass through ATP synthase, a series of protein conformation changes bring an ADP and a phosphate together to synthesize ATP. The electron transfer and the generation of ATP are often referred to as "oxidative phosphorylation" (Panel 3.6).
A general estimation of the energy yield in oxidative phosphorylation is 3 ATP per NADH and 2 ATP per FADH 2 . However, the amount of ATP generated per mole of NADH or FADH 2 (hence also per mole of glucose) varies somewhat among different species due to their variable expressions of ATP synthase. For mammals, about 30-32 moles of ATP.
• The higher concentration of protons in the cytosol and the negative charge inside the mitochondrion drives the proton to move into the mitochondrion • The proton passes through ATP synthase and converts ADP and P i to ATP Panel 3.6. Oxidative Phosphorylation Pathway.
• NADH and FADH 2 enter the electron transport chain, pass their high energy electron to electron carriers • As an electron passes the energetic ladder, it pumps protons out of the mitochondrion, increasing the pH inside the mitochondrion by 1.0 and generating a negative charge of ~120 mV across the mitochondrion's inner membrane • At the bottom of the energetic ladder, the electron and proton react with oxygen to form water Panel 3.5. Electron Transport are generated per mole of completely oxidized glucose (Panel 3.7). Older literature tends to list the number as 36 moles of ATP per mole of glucose. Under some physiological conditions, the electron transfer chain and oxidative phosphorylation are uncoupled. Instead of generating ATP, the energy from NADH is released as heat to maintain body temperature. This is seen in hibernating animals, for example. The amount of energy, 2 ATP and 2 NADH (or the equivalent of 6 ATP, since 1 NADH in the cytosol can be roughly considered to be 2 ATP), produced from splitting glucose into two moles of pyruvate is only about 1/6 of what can be generated from the complete oxidation of glucose to CO 2 and H 2 O. The vast majority of energy conversion in glucose oxidation therefore occurs in the mitochondria.
Pentose Phosphate Pathway (PPP).
The PPP is an important shunt from glycolysis that supplies fivecarbon sugars (in the form of sugar phosphate) and NADPH. Five-carbon sugar is converted into ribose and deoxyribose to make nucleotides and deoxynucleotides for RNA and DNA synthesis. NADPH supplies the reduction potential used in many biosynthetic reactions ( Figure 3 .6, Panel 3.8).
The PPP consists of an oxidative segment and a monosaccharide transformation segment. In the first segment, glucose 6-phosphate from glycolysis is oxidized to generate 2 NADPH and then decarboxylated to form the five-carbon ribulose 5-phosphate. The molecular transformation segment converts the five-carbon sugar phosphates to 1 three-carbon (GAP) and 2 six-carbon sugar phosphates (F6P) to rejoin glycolysis (Panel 3.8).
Cells use two different nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotides as reductive chemical potential energy carriers: NADH and NADPH. NADH is used to store chemical potential energy in glycolysis, the TCA Panel 3.7. Energetic Yield of Glucose Oxidation.
Cytosol.
Glucose + 2 NAD + 2 ADP + 2 P i → 2 pyruvate + 2 NADH + 2 ATP (Eq. 3-4) Mitochondria 2 pyruvate + 2 CoASH + 2 NAD + 2 ADP + 2 P i → 2 acetyl-COA + 2 NADH + 2 ATP + 2 CO 2 (Eq. 3-5).
2 acetyl-CoA + 6 NAD + 2 FAD + 2 GDP → 6 NADH + 2 FADH 2 + 2 GTP + 4 CO 2 (Eq. 3-6).
• In glycolysis and the TCA cycle, glucose carbons never react with O 2 • The energy is preserved in 12 NADH/FADH 2 that is converted to ATP in electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation • The overall energetic yield is ~30 ATP cycle, and lipid catabolism. Eventually, NADH is used to derive ATP in the mitochondria.
NADPH, on the other hand, carries a chemical potential that is used in biosynthetic reactions (e.g., the synthesis of lipids or nucleotides). NADPH is also used to reduce oxidized glutathione and to regenerate it. The reduced form of glutathione is important in maintaining the cell's reductive environment and in the suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
3 Ru5P ⇌ 2 F6P + GAP (Eq. 3-8).
The second segment of the PPP is a molecular conversion pool that allows a 2-C aldehyde (CHO -CH 2 -) unit or 3-C keto units (CH 2 OH -CO -CHOH -) to be translocated among a number of 3-C to 5-C aldoses and ketoses. These reversible reactions together allow the interconversion of carbohydrate molecules that are three to seven carbons in length. This "mixing pool" enables 5-C sugars from the first segment of the PPP to be connected to glycolysis through 6-C fructose 6-phosphate or 3-C glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
The first segment of the PPP generates 5-C ribulose and NADPH at a molecular ratio of 1:2. However, cells do not always need those two compounds at a 1:2 proportion. The molecular conversion in the second segment allows the pentose-phosphate:NADPH ratio to be increased or decreased according to cellular needs. If ribose is needed in a higher proportion, GAP and F6P can be used to generate more pentose phosphate. Conversely, if the pentose phosphate is needed in a smaller proportion, the extra pentose can be converted to F6P and GAP to re-enter glycolysis.
Lactate Formation.
In the complete oxidation of glucose to 6 CO 2 , 10 NADH and 2 FADH 2 are generated. Among them, 2 NADH are produced from glycolysis and the rest from the TCA cycle. They are oxidized in the electron transport chains in the mitochondria, consuming 6 O 2 . This regenerates the NAD and FAD that are needed in order to continue the oxidation of glucose. Without the regeneration of NAD from electron transfer, the continued oxidation of glucose would run out of NAD as a reactant and stop. In the absence of oxygen, the reactions in the TCA cycle that are dependent on a continuous supply of NAD also cease to operate. Micro organisms that are capable of anaerobic metabolism can divert the pyruvate to a more reduced compound, such as ethanol or lactate. The fermentative metabolism, in the course of reducing pyruvate, also oxidizes NADH and regenerates NAD to keep glycolysis running to supply cellular energy (Panel 3.9).
Under some physiological conditions, some tissue cells can metabolize glucose just like fermentation in microorganisms. For example, C 6 H 12 O 6 + 2 ADP + 2 P i + 2 NAD → 2 CH 3 COCOOH + 2 ATP + 2 NADH (glucose) (pyruvate) 2 ATP → work + 2 ADP + 2 P i 2 CH 3 COCOOH + 2 NADH → 2 C 2 H 5 OH + 2 CO 2 + 2 NAD (ethanol).
• Regenerate NAD to allow glucose utilization to continue Panel 3.9. Yeast Fermentation Converting Glucose to Ethanol during exercise, glucose consumption in muscle cells increases to boost energy output, often exceeding the capacity of the TCA cycle in the mitochondria. To keep the higher level of energy generation going, pyruvate is converted to lactate. The reaction converts NADH back to NAD that can be recycled to keep glycolysis running. The lactate produced is then excreted out of muscle cells (Panel 3.10). Mammalian cells in culture and cancer cells have a high glucose consumption rate and generate pyruvate at 1:2 molar ratio. But only a small portion of the pyruvate generated is transported into mitochondria to further oxidize to CO 2 . Cells appear to have a limited capacity to translocate pyruvate into the mitochondria. The rest of the pyruvate generated in glycolysis is converted to lactate. This occurs in spite of the presence of sufficient oxygen. The phenomenon is therefore different from anaerobic fermentation in bacteria or yeast, and is referred to as "aerobic glycolysis.".
Lactate synthesis is catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase. This reversible reaction converts 1 pyruvate and 1 NADH into 1 lactate and 1 NAD. In the conversion of glucose to 2 pyruvate in glycolysis, 2 ATP and 2 NADH are generated while also consuming 2 ADP and 2 NAD. Continued glucose metabolism through glycolysis requires continued supplies of both ADP and NAD as reactants. ATP formed in glycolysis is used by cells to perform many tasks, such as synthesis, maintaining osmotic balance, etc. It is continually being consumed in various cellular reactions and is converted back to ADP to resupply the reactant for glycolysis.
NADH is normally converted back to NAD through the electron transport chain in the mitochondria. To be regenerated in the electron transfer chain, the reducing equivalent of the cytosolic NADH generated in glycolysis must first enter the mitochondria and the regenerated NAD must be exported out of the mitochondria, as will be discussed later. Like the transport of pyruvate into the mitochondria, cells' capacity for transferring the reducing equivalent of NADH into the mitochondria is limited. The lactate dehydrogenase reaction in cytosol allows for NAD regeneration from NADH to take place, thereby enabling glycolysis to continue at a high flux (Panel 3.11). But, as a consequence, lactate must be excreted and it eventually accumulates in the medium. Under typical culture conditions, proliferating cells in culture convert 85-90% of their glucose intake to lactate. A significant portion of the other 10-15% of glucose is converted to CO 2 while the rest is incorporated into cell mass. At the completion of glycolysis, 2 ATP and 2 NADH are generated. This is in contrast to about ~30 ATP generated upon the complete oxidation of glucose. The 90% of glucose converted to lactate generates 1.8 ATP (2 ATP x 0.9), while the other 10% of glucose generates about 3 ATP (30 ATP x 0.1). Aerobic glycolysis generates a significant portion of the total energy of glucose catabolism in proliferating cells.
Not all cells in our body convert a large portion of the glucose they take up into lactate. The vast majority of cells in our body are in a quiescent (non-proliferating) state. They consume less glucose than proliferating cells. Excessive glucose consumption and lactate production, known as the Warburg effect, was first observed between normal tissues and cancer cells. While normal cells have a lower glucose flux, cancer and other fast-proliferating cells consume a larger amount of glucose and convert much of that glucose to lactate.
Carbon Flow and the Supply of Biosynthetic Precursors.
Among all of the pathways in the cellular metabolic network, glycolysis has the highest flux in terms of moles of substrate and reaction intermediates passing through. For proliferating cells in culture, the molar flux (based on the number of moles of each compound) or carbon flux (based on the number of moles of carbon atoms, i.e., the number of carbons in the compound multiplied by the number of moles of the compound) of glycolysis is normally several times higher than that of the TCA cycle. PPP flux usually constitutes only about 5% of glucose intake. Glycolysis and the TCA cycle also supply precursors to build cellular components. The culture medium does not necessarily supply cells with the right balance of all of the components that they need to synthesize cell mass and maintain cellular functions. The three main pathways for energy metabolism (glycolysis, the TCA cycle, PPP) also provide the precursors for the synthesis of some cellular materials. For example, DHAP in glycolysis supplies glycerol phosphate, which is used in the synthesis of phospholipids (Figure 3.7) . Glucose 6-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate are both sources of nucleotide sugars for glycan synthesis, such as UDP-galactose, UDP-glucose, and GDP-mannose. Except for liver cells (hepatocytes), cells in culture do not express enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis; that is, they cannot make hexose from lactate or amino acids. So, even if cells can derive energy from lactate and amino acids, they will still need hexose to synthesize ribose and glycans. α-ketoglutarate provides a carbon skeleton for glutamate and glutamine while oxaloacetate is used to make aspartate and asparagine.
Cells in culture take up a large quantity of amino acids from medium usually in excess of what is needed to make cell mass and product. Furthermore, the amino acids taken up are not necessarily of the stoichiometric amount that is needed for synthesis. The surplus of nitrogen is either excreted as ammonia or transferred as an amino group to Lipids pyruvate to form alanine, and then excreted. Since alanine is much less growth-inhibitory than ammonium, pyruvate has some moderating effect on ammonium toxicity. The carbon skeletons of the amino acids enter the carbon metabolism pathway through pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, and some TCA cycle intermediates (α-ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, oxaloacetate) where they are degraded in the TCA cycle or converted to other amino acids. At the start of the TCA cycle, one acetyl-CoA combines with one OAA to become one citrate (Figure 3.4a) . At the end of the cycle, one OAA must be regenerated to take on another acetyl-CoA for a second round of the cycle. If a portion of the carbon flow initiated from citrate is diverted from the cycle, or if extra carbon enters into the cycle, then the amount of OAA returning at the end will not be what is needed for starting the second round of the TCA cycle.
Examples of carbon infusion include the entry of excess aspartic acid into OAA or glutamic acid through α-KG. A prominent diversion of carbons from the TCA cycle occurs in the export of citrate to the cytosol, where it is converted to acetyl-CoA for fatty acid synthesis. α-KG may also be converted to glutamate and glutamine. Glutamine is then taken to nucleotide synthesis.
To balance the withdrawal and the infusion of TCA cycle intermediates, a number of reactions are in place, including the conversion of pyruvate to oxaloacetate and the conversion of glutamine to glutamic acid and then to α-ketoglutarate ( Figure 3 .8). Under typical culture conditions, a significant flux of citrate exports from the mitochondria and glutamate to nucleotide synthesis are needed to support cell growth. The deficit in the OAA supply is made up for by a high consumption rate of glutamine. The replenishment of the carbon deficit in the TCA cycle, called anaplerosis, will be discussed later.
Regulation of Glucose Metabolism.
D ifferent tissues in multicellular organisms play different physiological roles that often require them to have their particular metabolic characteristic. For example, muscle cells can ramp up glucose consumption quickly to generate energy during exercise; liver can take up the breakdown product of fat and convert it to glucose (gluconeogenesis); and adipose tissue can convert excess glucose to lipids for storage. All of these tissues have the same glycolysis pathway to metabolize glucose, but the pathway of each tissue also bears special characteristics that allow it to fulfill each tissue's specific function. The diversity of the metabolic capability in different tissues is endowed by the expression of different isozymes in different tissues.
Isozymes and Allosteric Regulation.
Different isoforms of the same enzyme or transport protein, although performing the same reaction, may have different catalytic rates (k cat ) or affinities for a substrate (K M ) (Panel 3.12). Note that K M is the substrate concentration at which the reaction rate is at half of its maximum. An isozyme that has a low K M for its substrate can catalyze the reaction at a low substrate concentration, while one that has a high K M will become active only at higher substrate concentrations. For example, all lactate dehydrogenase isoforms catalyze the reversible reaction of the conversion of pyruvate and NADH to lactate and NAD, but they have different K M 's to pyruvate and lactate. LDHC favors the conversion of lactate to pyruvate, while LDHA favors the reverse reaction.
In the case that an enzyme can accept a number of different substrates, different isozymes may have different substrate preferences. For example, mammals have many different isoforms of the glucose transporter. They have different affinities to glucose. Many of them can also transport some other monosaccharides such as galactose or glucosamine. An enzyme may also be subject to allosteric regulation, meaning that its activity is modulated by the binding of an effector molecule to the enzyme. For example, the binding of the product of the reaction can decrease the enzyme activity (i.e., feedback inhibition). In many biosynthetic pathways in microbial systems, the first enzyme in the pathway is feedback inhibited by the product of the pathway. Upon the accumulation of the product, its activity is decreased to reduce the flux through the pathway and to prevent wasteful accumulation of the product. Different isozymes may be subject to different allosteric regulations. Isoforms may also respond differently to hormonal or signaling stimuli.
Isozymes are thus important for giving different cells different metabolic characteristics. While in some cases isozymes of the same enzyme are products of alternative splicing in transcription, in other cases isozymes are coded by entirely distinct sequences in the genome.
Combination of Isozymes Gives Pathway Specific Characteristics.
A pathway serving a relatively simple function, such as the aspartate amino acid biosynthesis pathway in E. coli, may be controlled by feedback regulation in one or a small number of "rate-limiting" enzymes. However, glycolysis in mammals is a complex pathway serving many functions under a wide range of physiological conditions, from during a feast to under severe starvation. In a growing cell, glycolysis not only supplies pyruvate for energy generation in the TCA cycle, but also supplies PPP, sustains the biosynthesis of glycerol-phosphate (for lipids) and serine (through 3-phosphoglycerate), and maintains the supply of pyruvate for the biosynthesis of many cellular constituents. The needs of each branched pathway differ under different physiological conditions and in different tissues, so the supply rate to each branched pathway also differs. That supply rate is adjusted by controlling the concentration of the glycolysis intermediate at various branching points. Mammals have evolved to cope with such a wide range of needs in glycolysis by expressing different combinations of isoforms. The interactions of feed-forward and feedback inhibition and activation exerted by those isozymes can give rise to very diverse and complex metabolic behaviors that depend heavily on the environment. Cells in culture are derived from various tissues. They often bear the metabolic characteristics of their tissues of origin. However, cells in vitro are also different from their counterpart in the tissue. For one thing, the cultured cells are proliferating, unlike their quiescent counterparts in vivo. Many cells in culture are continuous cell lines or are even transformed. Their growth control differs from tissue cells. All these factors contribute to enzyme and isoform composition and the metabolic properties of cells in culture.
Isozymes are often named after the tissue in which they are the dominant isoform. However, the expression of isozymes is not tissue-exclusive. The liver isoform of PFK is widely expressed in many tissues. The expression of isozymes in a tissue cell is not limited to one form. Different isoforms of the same enzyme are often co-expressed in the same tissue or the same cell. Different combinations of isozymes give rise to different kinetics and regulatory behaviors that may meet different physiological needs.
With the available genomic tools, we can easily determine the relative expression of different isoforms of the key enzymes of glycolysis, and further evaluate how to influence cellular metabolism.
Key Isozymes in Regulating Glucose Metabolism.
Four reactions in glycolysis play key roles in regulating its flux: hexokinase (HK), phosphofructokinase (PFK), pyruvate kinase (PK), and 6-phosphofructo 2-kinase/fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (PFKFB) (Panel 3.12). These four enzymes along with pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) regulate the flux of glucose carbon and its distribution at the pyruvate node. We will take a simplified view to largely divide glycolysis into two types of metabolism: one high flux in proliferating cells and the other low flux in quiescent cells (Figure 3.9). These two types of metabolism are influenced by the isoforms involved, the composition of the medium, and the growth rate, among other factors. With some isoform combinations, a number of reaction steps are activated by the accumulation of F2,6P and F1,6P ( Figure  3 .9a). Upon full activation, one may see a 5-fold or higher increase in glucose consumption, whereas with the isoform combination depicted in Figure 3.9b, the degree of activation is much lower. Below, we will describe the allosteric regulation of a few major enzymes that play key roles in determining the flux. Table 3 .1 lists the compositions of the isozymes of glycolysis in a few human tissues.
Hexokinase.
Hexokinase-1 (HK1) is present in virtually all cells. It has a low K M for glucose and phosphorylates glucose for glycolysis even at a very low intracellular concentration. Liver cells additionally express glucokinase (GCK or HK4), which has a high K M and is active only when glucose concentration is high. HK4 phosphorylates glucose for conversion to glycogen storage when glucose is in excess.
PFK.
PFK converts F6P to become F16BP. It is pivotal in modulating the overall rate of glycolysis and is a key node in energy metabolism. Its activity is subjected to allosteric inhibition by ATP and citrate, and is activated by AMP. Citrate is a TCA cycle intermediate. The accumulation of citrate and ATP in the cytosol, along with a low concentration of AMP, is indicative of an abundance of cellular energy. Its activity is thus also suppressed by an abundance of cellular energy. PFK has three isozymes: liver (PFKL), muscle (PFKM), and platelet (PFKP). Among the three isoforms, PFKL and PFKM are activated allosterically by their own reaction product, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (F16BP). Upon a flux increase and initial accumulation of F16BP, the feedback activation quickly escalates the activity of PFKL and PFKM to increase the glycolysis rate. PFKM is inhibited by lactate, a characteristic which may facilitate the reduction of glycolysis flux at high lactate levels. This enzyme likely plays an important role in triggering the lactate consumption seen in the late culture stage (when lactate accumulates to high levels) in some bioprocess fed-batch cultures.
6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase / fructo-2,6-phosphate phosphatase (PFKFB).
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F26BP) is a shunted reaction product of glycolysis that plays a key regulatory role in rapidly adjusting the activity of PFK and the glycolysis flux (Figure 3 .9). It is not metabolized further or used in any biosynthesis, but is converted back to fructose 6-phosphate (F6P). Its concentration is a sensitive indicator of the "state" of glycolysis and is used for regulating the glycolysis flux. Both the synthesis of F26BP and its reversion to F6P are catalyzed by the same enzyme, a bi-functional PFKFB (also known as PFK-2). The kinase activity of PFKFB catalyzes the synthesis of F26BP and the phosphatase activity catalyzes the hydrolysis of F26BP to F6P. All three PFK isozymes are activated by F26BP, which activates PFK-1 by allosterically increasing its affinity for F6P, even in the presence of inhibitors such as ATP or lactate.
PFKFB has four isozymes, each with different kinase and phosphatase activities, allowing each to respond differently to regulators. A high kinase to phosphatase ratio allows for a higher accumulation of F26BP to exert a more robust activation of PFK activity. The brain isoform, PFKFB3, has the highest kinase to phosphatase activity and is expressed in several tumor cells. This suggests that PFKFB3 may be accountable for the glycolytic phenotype of reported cancerous cell lines by allowing them to have high cellular F26BP levels.
Pyruvate kinase.
The enzyme catalyzing the penultimate step of glycolysis, pyruvate kinase, has three isozymes in mammalian systems. The muscle isozyme is expressed as either of two splice variants, M1 or M2. Both muscle isoforms of PK are activated by phosphoenolpyruvate, but only PKM2 is also activated by F16BP. The M1 isoform is mostly expressed in adult tissues, whereas the M2 isoform is expressed in rapidly growing tissues, such as fetal and tumor tissues, and is also thought to be a critical player in the transformation leading to cancer.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK).
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC), which catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA (and generates a CO 2 and NADH), is a protein complex made of 30 copies of E1 (consisting of two subunits), 60 E2 and 12 E3 proteins. It has three serine residues that can be phosphorylated by PDK to render it inactive, and dephosphorylated by pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase to return it to active state. There are four different isoforms for PDK that have varying phosphorylation activity towards the three serine residues. They thus tune the activity of PDHC to regulate the carbon flux into the TCA cycle.
Growth Control and Metabolic Regulation.
The regulation of cellular metabolism is tightly linked to the control of cell growth. The signaling pathways and transcription factors that regulate a cell's growth rate play regulatory roles in regulating glucose metabolism. The transformation that causes cells to switch from a quiescent state to a proliferating state also triggers metabolic changes to increase their glucose uptake and glycolysis flux (Panel 3.13).
p53 is a major tumor suppressor that plays key roles in cell cycle arrest, senescence, apoptosis, and the regulation of glucose metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. It induces the overexpression of TIGAR (TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator) under mild oxidative stress conditions (Figure 3 .10). TIGAR contains a fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase catalytic activity domain, which mediates the degradation of fructose 2,6-phosphate and leads to a decrease in PFK-1 activity and the attenuation of the glycolytic flux.
p53 can also modulate the glycolytic rate by regulating the activity of PGM, GLUT1, and GLUT4 transporters. Furthermore, it up-regulates mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation by upregulating the expression of SCO2 (synthesis of cytochrome c oxidase 2), which mediates the assembly and activity of the cytochrome c oxidase complex.
AKT is a serine/threonine kinase that plays a key role in the regulation of cell proliferation and glucose metabolism. AKT exists in an active/phosphorylated form and an inactive/unphosphorylated form. The AKT signaling cascade has been shown to activate the transcription of GLUT1 and mediate the association of HK with the outer mitochondrial membrane (Figure 3 .11). The phosphorylated form of AKT (pAKT) can increase the phosphorylation of PFKFB to shift its kinase/phosphatase ratio to increase the formation of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate levels, which in turn increases PFK activity and glycolysis flux. A decrease in the growth rate of the cells observed during the course of the culture is accompanied by a decrease in the pAKT activity. MYC is a proto-oncogene whose pleiotropic regulatory roles include energy metabolism. It directly modulates the transcript level of glycolysis enzymes. Glycolytic enzymes have MYC canonical E-boxes in their promoter and are deregulated when MYC is overexpressed.
Regulation through the AKT signaling pathway provides a link between energy metabolism and cell proliferation in the tissue. Oncogenic transformation involves not only alterations in growth control but also invokes the expression of different isoforms or elevation of expression levels of key glycolysis enzymes that are hallmarks of fast growth. Virtually all proliferating cells in culture consume glucose at a high rate and convert the bulk of it into lactate.
Most cell lines of bioprocess importance have altered growth control that allows them to proliferate quickly in culture. During rapid growth, they exhibit a high glycolytic flux similar to other transformed cells. The decrease in glycolysis flux and the consumption of lactate as seen in some cultures occurs in the late culture stages when cell growth is already slow. Even for cells in culture, metabolism is linked to growth control.
Transport and Transporters.
E nergy metabolism takes place in multiple cellular compartments that are separated by lipid bilayer membranes. First, glucose must cross the cytoplasmic membrane to enter glycolysis in the cytosol. Next, the products from glycolysis (pyruvate and NADH, via the malate-aspartate shuttle) are transported into the mitochondria. Finally, metabolites such as lactate are excreted through the cytoplasmic membrane. This crossing of molecules across the membrane is mediated by a number of transporters.
Glucose Transporters.
Glucose transporters mediate the influx of glucose across the cytosolic membrane. There are two types of glucose transporters: GLUT and SGLT (Panel 3.14). The GLUT transporters are uniporters for facilitated transport, allowing glucose to move along its concentration gradient. The second type of glucose transporter, SGLT, is a co-transporter with Na + that is expressed in intestinal epithelial cells.
The GLUT transporters have twelve transmembrane regions and intracellular carboxyl and amino termini. According to common sequence motifs, they are divided into three subclasses (Table 3. 2). GLUT1 is ubiquitous, appearing in almost all cells (Panel 3.15). It can transport glucose and galactose in a concentration-dependent manner that is described by Michaelis-Menten kinetics (Figure 3.12) . Its K M for glucose is low (~1 mM). At the glucose concentration used in culture medium, the flux of GLUT1 is at its maximum. In some cells, GLUT1 is under the regulation of the transcription factor HIF-1 (hypoxia inducible factor). Under hypoxic conditions, the expression of GLUT1 is upregulated to increase the uptake rate of glucose. The K M of GLUT1 for galactose is rather high. When galactose is used as the only sugar, even at a high galactose concentration, the uptake rate and lactate production rate is low. A few other notable GLUT transporters are insulin-responsive GLUT4 and fructose-transporting GLUT5. In addition to GLUT1, cells in culture and in different tissues may express other GLUT transporters at different proportions. The expression of different transporters will give them different responses to the concentrations of glucose or other sugars.
SGLT, another class of glucose transporter, transports two sodium ions and one glucose molecule into the cell. The Na + concentration is low intracellularly but is high in the medium and in body fluid. The large sodium concentration difference and negative electric potential across the cytoplasmic membrane gives rise to a high propensity of Na + to enter the cell. Thus, the chemical potential energy of the sodium concentration difference and the electric potential is used to drive the uptake of glucose against a concentration gradient.
SGLT transport is abundant in intestinal epithelial cells and is responsible for moving glucose from the gut into the intestinal epithelial cells. The glucose is then exported into the bloodstream on the other side of the cellular barrier.
Lactate Transporters.
Lactate produced in glycolysis is excreted across the cytoplasmic membrane through monocarboxylate transporters (MCT). Lactate can also be consumed in some tissues and by cultured cells under some conditions. The uptake of lactate by cells is also mediated by MCT. Monocarboxylate transporters are largely divided into two categories: facilitated diffusion type monocarboxylate transporters and sodium-coupled monocarboxylate transporters (sMCT). The latter is expressed only in some tissue cells (kidney, colon epithelial cells) that can utilize the concentration gradient of sodium ions across its apical surface membrane to take up the solute. The solute transported by MCT and sMCT is not limited to lactate, and can also transport pyruvate, propionate, and other shortchain fatty acids.
Lactate is a negatively charged molecule. Its movement across the cellular membrane causes a charge imbalance and creates an electric potential across the membrane as a barrier for further transfer across the membrane, unless measures are taken to counteract the charge imbalance. The monocarboxylate transporters are a family of co-transporters that couple the transport of lactate to the transport of a hydrogen ion in the same direction to maintain the charge balance (Figure 3.13) . MCT is thus a symporter; its mechanism of transport is facilitated diffusion. A number of MCTs are expressed in different tissue cells. Four of them, with 12 transmembrane helices, have been shown to mediate reversible transport of lactate, pyruvate, and ketone bodies. By far, lactate is the most important species transferred. MCT1 favors the uptake of lactate, while MCT4 favors the excretion of lactate produced in glycolysis.
Lactate transport is enhanced by a large difference in lactate concentration between intracellular and extracellular environments. However, pH also affects the flux of lactate through MCT, with the enhancing or retarding effect being dependent on the direction of the proton gradient. MCT allows for lactate transport in both directions, for excretion as well as uptake. Keeping medium pH at a lower level reduces lactate production during the rapid growth period, but enhances lactate consumption in the stationary phase.
Mitochondrial Pyruvate Carrier (MPC).
Proliferating cells in culture typically channel about 1/10-1/20 of the carbons from their glucose intake to the mitochondria as pyruvate, where it is broken down to CO 2 . The molar flux of pyruvate into the mitochondria is thus about 1/5-1/10 of that of the glucose consumption rate or 1/10-1/20 of the lactate excretion flux. Assuming an average cell diameter of 15 μm, a mitochondrial diameter of 1 μm, and 1000 mitochondria per cell, the total surface area of mitochondria in a cell is in the same order of magnitude as the cytoplasmic membrane. Thus, the pyruvate flux across the mitochondrial membrane (μmole/μm 2 -h) is perhaps not as high as that of lactate passing through the cytoplasmic membrane.
The precise nature of the mitochondrial transport of pyruvate has been elusive until recently. Two proteins, mitochondrial pyruvate carriers MPC1 and MPC2, are involved in pyruvate transport. MPC1 and MPC2 have only 3 transmembrane helices. They are likely to form a protein complex (currently thought to be a heterodimer) to provide the transport activity. The transporter is also a symporter, co-transporting a proton to maintain charge neutrality. The 1.0 unit pH difference and −140 mV electric potential between the cytosol and the mitochondrial matrix provides a strong driving force for pyruvate transport into the mitochondria.
Not all pyruvate is generated from glycolysis. Pyruvate may also arise from catabolism of alanine and a few other amino acids. It may also be generated from acetyl-CoA shuttling, as will be discussed later in this chapter. Under some conditions, pyruvate may also be diverted to synthesize alanine. During rapid cell growth, these fluxes are relatively small compared to pyruvate synthesis from glycolysis. By and large, the flux of pyruvate into the mitochondria is estimated to be the difference between glucose flux in glycolysis and lactate production flux (Figure 3.9) .
Metabolic Homeostasis and Lactate Consumption.
C ells in culture have been selected for their capability to proliferate. The makeup of their glycolytic enzymes directs their metabolism to consume much glucose and convert most of it to lactate. Lactate accumulation in culture inhibits cell growth and hastens the decline of cell viability in the stationary phase. The phenomenon of high glucose consumption and high lactate production is seen in virtually all proliferating cells in culture. The problem is particularly acute in fed-batch cultures, in which continued glucose feeding raises both glucose and lactate to many times higher than their physiological levels. To achieve a high cell concentration and high productivity, it is beneficial to direct cell metabolism to a metabolic state that minimizes the accumulation of lactate.
High flux state.
The "default" glucose metabolism is at a high flux state, in which cells consume glucose at a high level and convert most of it to lactate. Figure  3 .14a illustrates a typical metabolic flux of a cultured mammalian cell line. If 100 moles of glucose are consumed in glycolysis, 200 moles each of pyruvate and NADH are generated. Here, for simplicity we neglect the diversion of carbons to the PPP, lipid biosynthesis, etc. Consider a scenario of a high flux state in which 90% (180 moles) of the pyruvate is channeled to lactate and excreted, and the rest (20 moles) of the pyruvate enters the mitochondria for the TCA cycle. Those 180 moles of pyruvate converted to lactate will also regenerate 180 moles of NADH to NAD. The remaining 20 moles of NADH will enter the mitochondria, where it is converted to NAD, consuming oxygen and generating H 2 O and ATP. In total, 200 moles of NAD are regenerated to sustain glycolysis at a steady state flux of 100 moles of glucose. NADH generated in glycolysis in the cytosol cannot enter the mitochondria, as there is no appropriate transporter. Instead, it is transported via the malate-aspartate shuttle, as will be discussed next.
Neglecting the other cytosolic reactions that involve pyruvate, the molar fluxes of pyruvate and NADH into the mitochondria are equal (Panel 3.16). Overall, 10% of glucose is oxidized to CO 2 while 90% • Pyruvate and NADH are generated in glycolysis at a 1:1 ratio • Both are transferred into the mitochondria and converted by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) • Altogether, 12 reducing equivalents (NADH / FADH 2 ) are generated to react with 6 O 2 , generating 6 H 2 O • 2 of the 12 reducing equivalents are generated in the cytosol (in glycolysis), 10 in the mitochondria • The 2 NADH generated in the cytosol need to be transferred into the mitochondria to feed into the electron transport chain, or oxidized to NAD in the LDH reaction Panel 3.16. Pyruvate and NADH Balance is converted to lactate. The 10% of glucose that is completely oxidized consumes 60 moles of O 2 , as seen in the stoichiometric equation (Panel 3.1). This is carried out by the carbon and reducing equivalent entering the mitochondria to react with 60 moles of O 2 and produce 60 moles of CO 2 and H 2 O (Eq. 3-1, Panel 3.1). The fluxes are thus all balanced. Above all, there appears to be a limit in the capacity of MPC or in the malate-aspartate shuttle to allow a much greater flux of carbon from glucose to enter the mitochondria. Virtually all cells in culture resort to high flux metabolism to generate energy. There have been many hypotheses to explain the benefit of the Warburg effect to fast-growing cells, and why no organism has evolved a way to support fast proliferation without producing a large amount of lactate.
Low flux, lactate-producing state.
Cells may enter a low glycolytic flux state under some conditions. Under most laboratory culture conditions, such as in a Petri dish, where cell density, lactate, and other metabolites are at low levels, the metabolism is mostly at a high flux state. As the metabolites accumulate and the growth rate decreases, as in a fed-batch culture, the combined effects of reduced AKT activation and possible lactate inhibition of PFKL lead the metabolism to a low flux state.
Even fast-growing cells can be guided to a low flux state by controlling glucose at low levels. Such a glucose flux control in yeast has been known for decades as the Crabtree effect. Even with plenty of oxygen, Saccharomyces cerevisiae ferments glucose to ethanol if glucose is kept at high levels. By controlling glucose at low levels to reduce its consumption, cells return to an oxidative metabolism with a reduced glucose flux and without ethanol production. This approach of restricting glucose supply and controlling glucose at low levels to reduce glycolysis flux and thereby reduce lactate flux has been demonstrated in hybridoma and CHO cell culture. By controlling glucose at very low levels or by replacing glucose with another sugar such as galactose or fructose that is only taken up slowly, even fast-growing cells can be manipulated at a low flux state. [1] [2] [3] [4] As the cell growth rate decreases in culture, the AKT activation of the glycolytic enzymes also reduces, 5 and it becomes more common to observe a switch to a low flux state. This may be facilitated by employing a slowly consumed sugar in the culture medium.
A typical flux distribution of cells in a low flux state, regardless of whether it is at a fast-growing or slow-growing state, is shown in Figure  3 .14b. The prerequisite of entering a low lactate-producing state is low glucose uptake. In Figure 3 .14, we assume that the flux into the mitochondria is fixed by the capacity of MPC. In practice, the value may increase somewhat by a fraction but not by a large margin. Glycolysis generates 60 moles of NADH, of which 20 are regenerated to NAD through oxidation in the mitochondria (via the malate-aspartate shuttle) and 40 through lactate production. This allows a steady state flux of 30 moles of glucose through glycolysis.
Low flux, lactate-consumption state.
Lactate transportation across the cytoplasmic membrane by MCT and lactate/pyruvate conversion by LDH are both reversible; one requires the co-transport of H + and the other the co-substrate NAD/N-ADH. They operate in unison in the same direction depending on the intracellular levels of NAD, NADH, pyruvate, and lactate, and the intracellular and extracellular concentration difference of lactate and H + . Their concentrations, in turn, are affected by the glycolysis generation rate and the mitochondrial intake rate of pyruvate. At a high glucose flux state, the pyruvate production rate is so high, exceeding its mitochondrial intake, that lactate is always excreted as described above. Conversely, at a low glycolysis flux state, the pyruvate production rate is low and it is possible to observe lactate consumption.
In vivo, lactate consumption occurs under some condition in some tissues, such as in the muscle, liver, and brain. In vitro, lactate consumption by cultured cells is seen when the glycolysis flux is low, typically after the rapid growth stage is over and when lactate has accumulated to a significant level. The propensity and rate of lactate consumption is thus affected by pH, where a low pH (high H + ) will facilitate lactate import and consumption.
A scenario of flux at a lactate consumption rate is shown in Figure  3 .14c. The reverse reaction of LDH generates pyruvate and NADH. Both pyruvate and NADH are further oxidized in the mitochondria. Since the overall capacity of MPC and the intake rate of pyruvate into the mitochondria is limited, the lactate consumption flux is also limited. It never reaches the magnitude of the flux of glucose at its high flux state. On a per cell basis, the specific lactate consumption rate is relatively small.
In a fed-batch culture, one may observe the three metabolic states happening in order (Figure 3.15) . In the fast-growing state, the metabolism is at a high flux state. As the growth rate slows down, it enters a low flux state with little lactate production, and then it may enter the lactate consumption state.
Glucose consumption in the lactate-consumption state.
The lactate consumed by cells cannot be converted to glucose in most cultured cells. A number of reactions in glycolysis are irreversible. The conversion of pyruvate to glucose in the reverse direction of glycolysis, called gluconeogenesis, requires the expression of a few additional enzymes to counter these irreversible reactions. In mammals, gluconeogenesis primarily occurs in the liver. During the period that cells are consuming lactate, many intermediates derived from glycolysis are still needed for maintaining cellular functions. For example, dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) is needed for supplying glycerol 3-phosphate for lipid synthesis and NADPH, derived in the PPP, is needed for reductive biosynthesis and for maintaining the cell's redox balance. Furthermore, glucose 6-phosphate is required to synthesize the glucosamine and galactose that are used in glycan synthesis for the production of recombinant proteins. The glycolysis pathway thus remains active during the lactate-consumption stage. The glucose consumption rate is small, but not zero (Panel 3.17).
NADH Balance Malate-Aspartate Shuttle.
A total of 12 moles of reducing equivalent (10 NADH and 2 FADH 2 ) are produced when 1 mole of glucose is completely oxidized to CO 2 through glycolysis and the TCA cycle. The 12 mole reducing equivalents consume 6 moles of O 2 in oxidative phosphorylation, consistent with the stoichiometry of glucose oxidation (1 glucose/6 O 2 ). Among the 12 NADH/FADH 2 , 10 are produced in the TCA cycle in the mitochondria and the other 2 NADH are produced in cytosolic glycolysis (Panel 3.16). The two reducing equivalents produced in the cytosol must then be transported into the mitochondria where their oxidation consumes the sixth molecule of O 2 .
NADH does not pass through the inner membrane of the mitochondria. Rather, it passes its reducing potential through a carrier system called the malate-aspartate shuttle. This system takes the reducing equivalent into the mitochondria through an exchange of molecules between the mitochondria and the cytosol. On the cytosolic side, NADH is oxidized to NAD and transfers its reducing equivalent to malate by reducing oxaloacetate. Malate is then transported across the mitochondrial membrane via an antiporter with α-KG going in the opposite direction. Once inside the mitochondria, the reducing equivalent is transferred back to NADH by oxidizing malate to oxaloacetate (Figure 3.16 The shuttle employs two antiporter systems involving malate/α-KG and aspartate/glutamate (hence the name "malateaspartate shuttle") to ensure the carbon flow and reducing equivalent flow are balanced by one other. The net result of a cycle of the shuttle is the transfer of a reducing equivalent from the cytosol to the mitochondria, or the conversion of a NADH to NAD in the cytosol and a simultaneous conversion of a NAD to NADH in the mitochondria. All other components involved in the shuttle then return to their original state. This is shown in Figure 3 .16, with the fluxes in opposite directions shown in gray with different arrowheads. On each side of the mitochondrial membrane, the same aminotransferase reaction (converting a glutamate/OAA pair to α-KG/aspartate pair, or vice versa) occurs, but operates in the opposite direction.
The transfer of the reducing equivalent of NADH from the cytosol into the mitochondria is therefore dependent not only on the NADH concentration but also on the concentrations of α-KG, malate, aspartate, and glutamate in the two compartments. Furthermore, diversions of fluxes of those shuttle components may also perturb the transport of the reducing equivalent.
Acetyl-CoA shuttle.
Acetyl-CoA is the building block of fatty acids and cholesterol. It is generated primarily through the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate in the mitochondria. However, fatty acid biosynthesis takes place in the cytosol. Acetyl-CoA does not pass through the bilayer membrane. Instead, it is exported to the cytosol via an indirect process called the acetyl-CoA shuttle (Figure 3.7) . Citrate, formed by condensation of OAA and acetyl-CoA in the TCA cycle, is diverted from the TCA cycle and transported into the cytosol by an antiporter with one malate being transported in the opposite direction (Panel 3.18). Once in the cytosol, citrate is split into OAA and acetyl-CoA, consuming one ATP. Acetyl-CoA is then used for lipid biosynthesis. OAA gets reduced to malate at the expense of one NADH. Malate is then transported back to the mitochondria, or is converted to pyruvate after releasing a CO 2 and consuming one NA-DPH. Pyruvate then recycles into the mitochondria. The process of making fatty acids using acetyl-CoA is thus energetically expensive. Therefore, citrate and malate cross the mitochondrial membrane at a significant rate to sustain lipid biosynthesis. Citrate is not only present in the mitochondria, but also in the cytosol. Its accumulation can lead to allosteric inhibition of the conversion of F6P to F16BP in glycolysis.
Anaplerotic metabolism.
As discussed earlier, the TCA cycle does not run perfect cycles all the time. When citrate, OAA, and other compounds are withdrawn from the cycle to serve other biosynthetic roles, they must be replenished in order to sustain the cycling at a steady state. This replenishment is mostly carried out by glutamine through anaplerotic reactions (Panel 3.19). Cells in culture consume glutamine at a high rate. The amount of glutamine consumed is in excess of that needed for biomass synthesis. Nearly half of the glutamine is converted to glutamate, which then enters the TCA cycle via α-KG to replenish OAA. α-KG can also be converted to isocitrate through an isocitrate dehydrogenase I catalyzed reaction at the expense of 1 NADPH. Isocitrate then becomes citrate for export out of the mitochondria. Another enzyme, pyruvate carboxylase, converts pyruvate to OAA and can also serve to replenish OAA to allow the TCA cycle to continue.
In the Mitochondrial Matrix.
•.
Other fluxes across the mitochondria.
Each pyruvate catabolized through the TCA cycle generates about 15 ATP and 3 CO 2 . These products are exported to the cytosol. The exportation of ATP necessitates the importation of an equal amount of ADP and PO 3-4 for its synthesis. Besides these major species, many other molecules (including amino acids and nucleotides) are transported into the mitochondria for DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.
Transportation across the mitochondrial inner membrane is dynamic and complex. Many compounds crossing the membrane are charged, yet their transport should not disrupt the proton and electric potential gradient that is fundamental to the energy generation function of the mitochondria. The transport across the mitochondrial membrane must be tightly regulated. Our understanding of that regulation is still rather limited.
Glutamine and Its Role in Energy Metabolism.
1/10 that of glucose for many cell lines. G M ost cultured cells consume glutamine at a very high level, second only to glucose. Its molar consumption rate is about 1/5 to lutamine is not an essential amino acid for mammals; it becomes essential when cells are isolated from tissue and begin to grow in culture. Many tissues express glutamine synthetase that converts glutamic acid to glutamine by incorporating an ammonium at the expense of an ATP. The transcript level of this enzyme varies in cultured cells. Some cell lines can be readily adapted to grow in the absence of glutamine, apparently by increased glutamine synthase activity, while most cells are cultured in glutamine-supplemented medium.
Glutamine is a major amino acid constituent of cellular proteins. Additionally, its amide group supplies the nitrogen in the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases, which are the backbone of nucleic acids. However, the amount of glutamine consumed by cells far exceeds what is needed for synthesizing cellular components.
A large portion of glutamine is converted to glutamate by glutaminase in the cytosol or mitochondria. Glutamate in the mitochondria is converted to α-KG via glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), which releases an ammonium and NADH. Glutamate is also converted to α-KG via an aminotransferase reaction that transfers its amino group to the receiving OAA or pyruvate, forming aspartate or alanine, respectively. α-KG then enters the TCA cycle. The aminotransferase reaction retains the amino group in an amino acid, while the dehydrogenase reaction loses the amino group to ammonium. The former is likely to be favored in proliferating cells. Through α-ketoglutarate, glutamine is a major contributor to central metabolic flux by fulfilling its anaplerotic role as discussed above. The conversion of glutamine to α-KG releases one or two ammonium, depending on the path taken (aminotransferase or glutamate dehydrogenase). The ammonium generated is excreted to the extracellular environment. The ammonium that is released from glutamine contributes to the waste metabolite accumulation.
Amino Acid Metabolism.
In addition to providing the building blocks for protein synthesis, amino acids are also used in the biosynthesis of many other cellular components. They contribute the nitrogen atom and amino group in the synthesis of nucleoside bases and nitrogen-containing sugars. They also provide part of their carbon skeleton to form groups like the methyl group (Panel 3.20). Mammals can synthesize only some of the twenty amino acids used in the translational synthesis of proteins. The nine (depending on the species) essential amino acids that mammals cannot synthesize must be acquired through diet. The non-essential amino acids alanine and aspartic acid (and asparagine) are synthesized from pyruvate and OAA, respectively by acquiring the amino group from donor amino acid glutamate through transaminase reactions. Glutamate is derived from glutamine supplied in the medium or formed by incorporating ammonium into α-KG at the expense of an NADH via a glutamate dehydrogenase reaction. The synthetic pathways of serine, cysteine, and arginine are expressed in many cells. Tyrosine is derived from phenylalanine. However, in cultured cells, the supply rates of these amino acids may be too low for proliferation. It is important to remember that an industrial high-producing cell line diverts a large portion of its amino acid pool to making the recombinant product. Even though non-essential amino acids can be synthesized by cells, their provision rate (i.e., the sum of uptake and synthesis) must be sufficiently high to prevent the misincorporation of amino acids into proteins. It has been shown that the depletion of the non-essential amino acid asparagine in culture medium can lead to amino acid misincorporation into the product protein.
Amino Acid Transport.
Amino acids are taken up by cells through a large number of amino acid transporters (Figure 3.17) . Most amino acid transporters transfer a group of amino acids with similar chemical characteristics, such large neutral (uncharged side chain) amino acids, cationic, or anionic amino acids. The uptake rate of a particular amino acid is thus not only dependent on its own concentration, but also on the concentrations of other amino acids that compete for the same transporter. One amino acid may be taken up through more than one transporter, albeit with different affinities. Transport of amino acids across the cytoplasmic membrane is thus rather complex, and changing the concentration of one or several amino acids may affect the uptake rates of many.
Amino Acid Degradation and Growth Inhibition.
In many industrial processes, especially in fed-batch cultures, concentrated amino acid solution is fed to the culture intermittently (see Chapter 9), causing some amino acids to accumulate to high levels transiently. This high level of amino acids may lead to excessive consumption. The amino acids taken up by cells in excess of cellular need are stripped of their nitrogen atoms and metabolized to pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, propionyl-CoA, or TCA cycle intermediates to enter energy metabolism ( Figure 3.18, Panel 3.21) . Some catabolic products are secreted into the medium. The catabolism of amino acids also releases ammonium. Ammonium and some catabolic products are growth inhibitory when accumulated to high levels. The catabolism of methionine, valine, and isoleucine gives rise to propionyl-CoA that is then carboxylated to methylmalonyl-CoA and further to succinyl-CoA, which enters the TCA cycle. In animals and humans, insufficient reactivity in the carboxylation reaction can lead to propionic acidemia. In culture, the accumulation of aliphatic amino acid degradation products may also lead to growth inhibition. 6 Similarly, the accumulation of the catabolic intermediates of aromatic amino acids (phenylalanine and tyrosine), especially fumarylacetoacetate, can be fatal in animals deficient in its degradation enzyme if left untreated. A number of inborn diseases of amino acid catabolism are caused by the accumulation of catabolic metabolites. The catabolism of amino acids typically takes place in the liver. Although cultured cells are not derived from individuals with inborn errors, the expression level of those catabolic enzymes in those cells may not be programmed to catabolize amino acids efficiently. At a very high cell concentration in the reactor, and with excessive feeding of amino acids, the catabolic products, both ammonium and reaction intermediates, may become growth inhibitory.
Lipid Metabolism.
Lipid Transport L ipids serve many functions in the body. Phospholipids are critical components of the cell membrane, glycerides store energy, and sterols are not only constituents of the cell membrane but also hormones. Although their role in cultured cells is primarily as the constituent of cell membranes, they are also important in signaling, protein trafficking, and protein-membrane interactions (Panel 3.22). However, as cells grow and the membrane expands, lipids must be supplied at a sufficient rate.
• Excess amino acids taken up by cells must be excreted • The nitrogen (amino group) is removed from the carbon skeleton by transamination or oxidative/non-oxidative deamination. The excess nitrogen is excreted as ammonium ions or amino acids (e.g., alanine, proline, asparagine) • The fate of the carbon skeleton is to enter the TCA cycle through pyruvate, acetoacetyl-coA, oxaloacetate, or α-ketoglutarate • The degradation of aromatic and aliphatic amino acids generates growth-inhibitory metabolites Panel 3.21. Amino Acid Degradation through biosynthesis and media provision. A balanced lipid composition in the cellular membrane is important in maintaining cellular vitality. However, our understanding of the balanced state of cellular lipids is rather limited. The content of lipids in cell culture media varies widely, from high-serum-containing media that is rich in various lipids and lipoproteins to very lean media with only minimal amounts of lipid precursors, such as ethanolamine and a small number of fatty acids. Fatty acids and lipid precursors like ethanolamine may be directly dissolved in media. Most lipids are supplied as serum lipoproteins, conjugated to serum albumin, as liposomes, or as solubilized conjugates, such as sorbitol-fatty acid esters. Although some cells can be cultured in lipid-free media, most cell culture media contains some fatty acids and lipids.
Cellular uptake of lipids is mediated by receptors of the lipoprotein lipid carriers, by endocytosis of membrane vesicles, or by diffusion. Cells readily take up fatty acids, phospholipids, and cholesterol from the medium and incorporate them into cellular lipids. The cellular uptake of fatty acids is a passive, non-energy-dependent process. After being taken up by cells, fatty acids quickly become esters; the intracellular levels of free fatty acids are quite low. Cholesterol is complexed to low density lipoprotein (LDL) in the body and is taken up by cells through the LDL receptor. For cells in culture, cholesterol is often supplied as a conjugate with serum albumin, or as complexes with cyclodextrin.
The lipid composition in the bilayer membrane affects membrane fluidity and permeability. Not all lipid bilayer membranes are the same. The lipid composition of the outer leaflet and the inner leaflet of the cytoplasmic membrane, for example, differ from each other. The plasma membrane is enriched in cholesterol, while the amount of cholesterol in the ER and other organelles is much less. There is very little cholesterol in the inner mitochondrial membrane. After being taken up by cells, lipids have to be distributed to different organelles to give them distinctive membrane lipid compositions. Their transport is mediated by a number of lipid transport proteins or by membrane vesicles for those organelles.
After processing in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi apparatus, recombinant proteins are transported via membrane vesicles to the cytoplasmic membrane for secretion. Membrane homeostasis and organelle biogenesis, therefore, also affect the productivity of recombinant proteins.
Fatty Acid Metabolism.
Most cells have the capability of synthesizing various fatty acids. Under starvation conditions, cells also perform β-oxidation to degrade fatty acids into acetyl-CoA in the mitochondria or peroxisomes (Panel 3.23). Acetyl-CoA then enters the TCA cycle and generates energy.
Fatty acids are synthesized from acetyl-CoA in the cytosol. The first step of fatty acid synthesis involves adding a CO 2 to acetyl-CoA to form malonyl-CoA, which then reacts with acetyl-CoA to become a four-carbon fatty acyl-CoA. This is a case where CO 2 is an essential substrate for biosynthesis, not merely a catabolic product. Fatty acid synthesis, therefore, involves the step-wise elongation processes of using three-carbon malonyl-CoA to add a two-carbon unit to fatty acyl-CoA in each cycle. NADPH is also used to provide energy in this reductive synthesis reaction. There are a number of fatty acid synthetases that can synthesize fatty acids to different lengths.
The fatty acid products from elongation reactions are all saturated fatty acids. Double bonds are then synthesized by unsaturation reactions after saturated fatty acids have been made.
Cholesterol and Its Biosynthesis.
Cholesterol is a 27-carbon molecule that has a hydrocarbon chain linked to aliphatic rings (Figure 3.19) . A hydroxyl group attached to the aliphatic ring allows it to interact with the head group of phospholipids while the hydrocarbon chain is well embedded in the membrane. Mammals require cholesterol as a constituent of cellular membranes and as a precursor for the synthesis of steroid hormones, bile acids, and lipoproteins (Panel 3.24). Cholesterol is relatively insoluble and resides exclusively in various cell membranes. Its regulation is particularly important since excess cholesterol forms solid crystals, leading to cell death.
