Our results demonstrate that FUT8 knockout has the essential characteristics of host cells for robust manufacture of fucose-negative therapeutic antibodies with enhanced ADCC. Antibodies bearing high levels of N-linked mannose-5 glycan (Man5) have been reported to exhibit enhanced antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) compared with antibodies with fucosylated complex or hybrid glycans. Studies have shown that high mannose glycoforms can be modulated through the genetic engineering of cell lines, addition of inhibitors to key enzymes in the glycosylation pathways, and varying cell culture conditions. This approach utilizes mannose as a carbon source and the ratio of mannose to total hexose (glucose and mannose) in feed media determines the extent of HM glycan content of an antibody expressed in cell culture. Further full glycan map analysis shows that HM increase predominantly correlates with the decrease in G0F glycan, with minimum impact on other glycoforms. Effects of bioreactor type and pH control on cell growth and metabolism and on recombinant protein production and glycosylation were determined. The 24-DWP culture conditions were found to influence the levels of acidic species, reduce the G0 N-glycan species, and increase the high-mannose N-glycan species. Cobalt at 50ʵM concentration causes slight increase in G1F glycans (mono galactosylated) as previously reported. Taken together, the application of ratiometric pH-sensitive FPs in monitoring the Golgi pH of CHO cells during culture provides a new perspective to improve protein glycosylation through pHi control. Using univariate analyses, we determined that different media resulted in diverse amounts of terminal galactosylation, high mannose glycoforms, and aglycosylation. It is therefore of interest to examine the impact of mild hypothermic temperatures on both the yield and quality of transiently expressed proteins and the relationship to changes in cellular processes and metabolism. Studies have shown that high mannose glycoforms can be modulated through the genetic engineering of cell lines, addition of inhibitors to key enzymes in the glycosylation pathways, and varying cell culture conditions. In cases where the clinical efficacy of an antibody is to some extent mediated by its ADCC effector function, afucosylated N-glycans could help to reduce dose requirement and save manufacturing costs. The elevated CMP-sialic acid content induced by N-acetylmannosamine had no effect on the overall level of sialylation of TIMP-1 produced by both CHO and NS0 cells, although the ratio of N-glycolylneuraminic acid:N-acetylneuraminic acid associated with NS0-derived TIMP-1 changed from 1:1 to 1:2. Shear stress in suspension culture was investigated as a possible manipulative parameter for the control of glycosylation of the recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator protein (r-tPA) produced by recombinant Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell culture, grown in protein-free media. Use of a small molecule cell cycle inhibitor to control cell growth and improve specific productivity and product quality of recombinant proteins in CHO cell cultures.